STOIC SIX PACK 4



THE SCEPTICS





Sextus Empiricus

Diogenes Laërtius

Mary Mills Patrick

Norman MacColl

Edwyn Bevan





Stoic Six Pack 4 – The Sceptics by Sextus Empiricus, Diogenes Laërtius, Mary Mills Patrick, Norman MacColl and Edwyn Bevan.





Printed in the United States of America.

First printing, 2015.

Enhanced Media Publishing.



Copyright © Enhanced Media 2015.



All rights reserved. This book or any portion thereof may not be reproduced or used in any manner whatsoever without the express written permission of the publisher except for the use of brief quotations in a book review.



Pyrrhonic Sketches by Sextus Empiricus. Translated by Mary Mills Patrick. First published in 1889.



Sextus Empiricus and Greek Scepticism by Mary Mills Patrick. First published in 1889.



Life of Pyrrho by Diogenes Laërtius. Translated by Robert Drew Hicks. First published in 1925.



The Greek Sceptics: From Pyrrho to Sextus by Normal MacColl. First published as The Greek Sceptics, from Pyrrho to Sextus, an essay by Norman MacColl in 1869.



Stoics and Sceptics by Edwyn Bevan. First published as Stoics and Sceptics - Four lectures delivered in Oxford during

Hilary term 1913 for the common university fund by Edwyn Bevan in 1880.



Life of Carneades by Diogenes Laërtius. Translated by Robert Drew Hicks. First published in 1925.





TABLE OF CONTENTS



PYRRHONIC SKETCHES

By

Sextus Empiricus

BOOK I

CHAPTER I

The Principal Differences between Philosophers

CHAPTER II

Ways of Treating Scepticism

CHAPTER III

The Nomenclature of Scepticism

CHAPTER IV

What is Scepticism?

CHAPTER V

The Sceptic

CHAPTER VI

The Origin of Scepticism

CHAPTER VII

Does the Sceptic Dogmatize?

CHAPTER VIII

Is Scepticism a Sect?

CHAPTER IX

Does the Sceptic Study Natural Science?

CHAPTER X

Do the Sceptics deny Phenomena?

CHAPTER XI

The Criterion of Scepticism

CHAPTER XII

What is the aim of Scepticism?

CHAPTER XIII

The General Method of Scepticism

CHAPTER XIV

The Ten Tropes

CHAPTER XV

The Five Tropes

CHAPTER XVI

The Two Tropes

CHAPTER XVII

What are the Tropes for the overturning of Aetiology?

CHAPTER XVIII

The Sceptical Formulae

CHAPTER XIX

The Formula "No more."

CHAPTER XX

Aphasia

CHAPTER XXI

"Perhaps," and "It is possible," and "It may be."

CHAPTER XXII

The Suspension of Judgment

CHAPTER XXIII

The Formula "I determine Nothing."

CHAPTER XXIV

The Formula "Every thing is Undetermined."

CHAPTER XXV

The Formula "Every thing is Incomprehensible."

CHAPTER XXVI

The Formulae

CHAPTER XXVII

The Formula

CHAPTER XXVIII

General Observations on the Formulae of the Sceptics

CHAPTER XXIX

In what does the Sceptical School differ from the Philosophy of Heraclitus?

CHAPTER XXX

In what does the Sceptical School differ from the Philosophy of Democritus?

CHAPTER XXXI

In what does Scepticism differ from the Cyrenaic Philosophy?

CHAPTER XXXII

In what does Scepticism differ from the Philosophy of Protagoras?

CHAPTER XXXIII

In what does Scepticism differ from the Academic Philosophy?

CHAPTER XXXIV

Is Empiricism in Medicine the same as Scepticism?

SEXTUS EMPIRICUS AND GREEK SCEPTICISM

By Mary Mills Patrick

CHAPTER I

The Historical Relations of Sextus Empiricus

CHAPTER II

The Position and Aim of Pyrrhonism

CHAPTER III

The Sceptical Tropes

CHAPTER IV

Aenesidemus and the Philosophy of Heraclitus

CHAPTER V

Critical Examination of Pyrrhonism

LIFE OF PYRRHO

By Diogenes Laërtius

THE GREEK SCEPTICS:

FROM PYRRHO TO SEXTUS

By

Norman Maccoll

PYRRHO AND TIMON

THE NEW ACADEMY

THE LATER SCEPTICS

THE PYRRHONEANS AND NEW ACADEMY CONTRASTED

STOICS AND SCEPTICS

By

Edwyn Bevan

LECTURE I

ZENO AND THE STOA

LECTURE II

THE STOA (continued)

LECTURE III

POSIDONIUS

LECTURE IV

THE SCEPTICS

LIFE OF CARNEADES

By

Diogenes Laërtius

IMAGE GALLERY

Michel Eyquem de Montaigne (1533-1592)

Knossos Fresco

Roman marble bust of Epicurus

Small bronze bust of Epicurus from Herculaneum

The Nuremburg Chronicle

Plutarch (c. AD 46 – AD 120)

Democritus (center) and Protagoras (right)

Democritus

Democritus by Hendrick ter Brugghen, 1628

Posidonius (c. 135 BCE – c. 51 BCE)





PYRRHONIC SKETCHES


By


Sextus Empiricus





BOOK I





CHAPTER I


The Principal Differences between Philosophers





It is probable that those who seek after anything whatever, will either find it as they continue the search, will deny that it can be found and confess it to be out of reach, or will go on seeking it. Some have said, accordingly, in regard to the things sought in philosophy, that they have found the truth, while others have declared it impossible to find, and still others continue to seek it. Those who think that they have found it are those who are especially called Dogmatics, as for example, the Schools of Aristotle and Epicurus, the Stoics and some others. Those who have declared it impossible to find are Clitomachus, Carneades, with their respective followers, and other Academicians. Those who still seek it are the Sceptics. It appears therefore, reasonable to conclude that the three principal kinds of philosophy are the Dogmatic, the Academic, and the Sceptic. Others may suitably treat of the other Schools, but as for the Sceptical School, we shall now give an outline of it, remarking in advance that in respect to nothing that will be said do we speak positively, that it must be absolutely so, but we shall state each thing historically as it now appears to us.





CHAPTER II


Ways of Treating Scepticism





One way of treating the Sceptical philosophy is called general, and the other special. The general method is that by which we set forth the character of Scepticism, declaring what its idea is, what its principles are, its mode of reasoning, its criterion, and its aim. It presents also, the aspects of doubt and the way in which we should understand the Sceptical formulae, and the distinction between Scepticism and the related Schools of philosophy. The special method, on the contrary, is that by which we speak against each part of so-called philosophy. Let us then treat Scepticism at first in the general way, beginning our delineation with the nomenclature of the Sceptical School.





CHAPTER III


The Nomenclature of Scepticism





The Sceptical School is also called the "Seeking School," from its spirit of research and examination; the "Suspending School," from the condition of mind in which one is left after the search, in regard to the things that he has examined; and the "Doubting School," either because, as some say, the Sceptics doubt and are seeking in regard to everything, or because they never know whether to deny or affirm. It is also called the Pyrrhonean School, because Pyrrho appears to us the best representative of Scepticism, and is more prominent than all who before him occupied themselves with it.





CHAPTER IV


What is Scepticism?





The goal of the Sceptical School is to place the phenomenal in opposition to the intellectual "in any way whatever," and thus through the equilibrium of the reasons and things opposed to each other, to reach, first the state of suspension of judgment and afterwards that of imperturbability. By the phenomenal, we understand the sensible, hence we place the intellectual in opposition to it. The phrase "in any way whatever," may refer to the placing the phenomenal and intellectual in opposition. For we place these in opposition to each other in a variety of ways, the phenomenal to the phenomenal, and the intellectual to the intellectual, or reciprocally, and we say "in any way whatever," in order that all methods of opposition may be included. Or "in any way whatever" may refer to the phenomenal and the intellectual, so that we need not ask how does the phenomenal appear, or how are the thoughts conceived, but that we may understand these things in a simple sense.

By "reasons opposed to each other," we do not by any means understand that they deny or affirm anything, but simply that they offset each other. By equilibrium, we mean equality in regard to trustworthiness and untrustworthiness, so that of the reasons that are placed in opposition to each other, one should not excel another in trustworthiness.





CHAPTER V


The Sceptic





What is meant by a Pyrrhonean philosopher can be understood from the idea of the Sceptical School. He is a Pyrrhonean, namely, who identifies himself with this system.





CHAPTER VI


The Origin of Scepticism





Scepticism arose in the beginning from the hope of attaining ataraxia; for men of the greatest talent were perplexed by the contradiction of things, and being at a loss what to believe, began to question what things are true, and what false, hoping to attain ataraxia as a result of the decision. The fundamental principle of the Sceptical system is especially this, namely, to oppose every argument by one of equal weight, for it seems to us that in this way we finally reach the position where we have no dogmas.





CHAPTER VII


Does the Sceptic Dogmatize?





We say that the Sceptic does not dogmatize. We do not say this, meaning by the word dogma the popular assent to certain things rather than others (for the Sceptic does assent to feelings that are a necessary result of sensation, as for example, when he is warm or cold, he cannot say that he thinks he is not warm or cold), but we say this, meaning by dogma the acceptance of any opinion in regard to the unknown things investigated by science. For the Pyrrhonean assents to nothing that is unknown. Furthermore, he does not dogmatize even when he utters the Sceptical formulae in regard to things that are unknown, such as "Nothing more," or "I decide nothing," or any of the others about which we shall speak later. For the one who dogmatizes regards the thing about which he is said to dogmatize, as existing in itself; the Sceptic does not however regard these formulae as having an absolute existence, for he assumes that the saying "All is false," includes itself with other things as false, and likewise the saying "Nothing is true"; in the same way "Nothing more," states that together with other things it itself is nothing more, and cancels itself therefore, as well as other things. We say the same also in regard to the other Sceptical expressions. In short, if he who dogmatizes, assumes as existing in itself that about which he dogmatizes, the Sceptic, on the contrary, expresses his sayings in such a way that they are understood to be themselves included, and it cannot be said that he dogmatizes in saying these things. The principal thing in uttering these formulae is that he says what appears to him, and communicates his own feelings in an unprejudiced way, without asserting anything in regard to external objects.





CHAPTER VIII


Is Scepticism a Sect?





We respond in a similar way if we are asked whether Scepticism is a sect or not. If the word sect is defined as meaning a body of persons who hold dogmas which are in conformity with each other, and also with phenomena, and dogma means an assent to anything that is unknown, then we reply that we have no sect. If, however, one means by sect, a school which follows a certain line of reasoning based on phenomena, and that reasoning shows how it is possible to apparently live rightly, not understanding "rightly" as referring to virtue only, but in a broader sense; if, also, it leads one to be able to suspend the judgment, then we reply that we have a sect. For we follow a certain kind of reasoning which is based upon phenomena, and which shows us how to live according to the habits, laws, and teachings of the fatherland, and our own feelings.





CHAPTER IX


Does the Sceptic Study Natural Science?





We reply similarly also to the question whether the Sceptic should study natural science. For we do not study natural science in order to express ourselves with confidence regarding any of the dogmas that it teaches, but we take it up in order to be able to meet every argument by one of equal weight, and also for the sake of ataraxia. In the same way we study the logical and ethical part of so-called philosophy.





CHAPTER X


Do the Sceptics deny Phenomena?





Those who say that the Sceptics deny phenomena appear to me to be in ignorance of our teachings. For as we said before, we do not deny the sensations which we think we have, and which lead us to assent involuntarily to them, and these are the phenomena. When, however, we ask whether the object is such as it appears to be, while we concede that it appears so and so, we question, not the phenomenon, but in regard to that which is asserted of the phenomenon, and that is different from doubting the phenomenon itself. For example, it appears to us that honey is sweet. This we concede, for we experience sweetness through sensation. We doubt, however, whether it is sweet by reason of its essence, which is not a question of the phenomenon, but of that which is asserted of the phenomenon. Should we, however, argue directly against the phenomena, it is not with the intention of denying their existence, but to show the rashness of the Dogmatics. For if reasoning is such a deceiver that it well-nigh snatches away the phenomena from before your eyes, how should we not distrust it in regard to things that are unknown, so as not to rashly follow it?





CHAPTER XI


The Criterion of Scepticism





It is evident that we pay careful attention to phenomena from what we say about the criterion of the Sceptical School. The word criterion is used in two ways. First, it is understood as a proof of existence or non-existence, in regard to which we shall speak in the opposing argument. Secondly, when it refers to action, meaning the criterion to which we give heed in life, in doing some things and refraining from doing others, and it is about this that we shall now speak. We say, consequently, that the criterion of the Sceptical School is the phenomenon, and in calling it so, we mean the idea of it. It cannot be doubted, as it is based upon susceptibility and involuntary feeling. Hence no one doubts, perhaps, that an object appears so and so, but one questions if it is as it appears.

Therefore, as we cannot be entirely inactive as regards the observances of daily life, we live by giving heed to phenomena, and in an unprejudiced way. But this observance of what pertains to the daily life, appears to be of four different kinds. Sometimes it is directed by the guidance of nature, sometimes by the necessity of the feelings, sometimes by the tradition of laws and of customs, and sometimes by the teaching of the arts. It is directed by the guidance of nature, for by nature we are capable of sensation and thought; by the necessity of the feelings, for hunger leads us to food, and thirst to drink; by the traditions of laws and customs, for according to them we consider piety a good in daily life, and impiety an evil; by the teaching of the arts, for we are not inactive in the arts we undertake. We say all these things, however, without expressing a decided opinion.





CHAPTER XII


What is the aim of Scepticism?





It follows naturally in order to treat of the aim of the Sceptical School. An aim is that for which as an end all things are done or thought, itself depending on nothing, or in other words, it is the ultimatum of things to be desired.

For as soon as he began to philosophise he wished to discriminate between ideas, and to understand which are true and which are false. He met, however, with contradictions of equal weight, and, being unable to judge, he withheld his opinion; and while his judgment was in suspension ἀταραξία followed, as if by chance, in regard to matters of opinion. For he who is of the opinion that anything is either good or bad by nature is always troubled, and when he does not possess those things that seem to him good he thinks that he is tortured by the things which are by nature bad, and pursues those that he thinks to be good. Having acquired them, however, he falls into greater perturbation, because he is excited beyond reason and without measure from fear of a change, and he does everything in his power to retain the things that seem to him good.

But he who is undecided, on the contrary, regarding things that are good and bad by nature, neither seeks nor avoids anything eagerly. For that which is related of Apelles the painter happened to the Sceptic. It is said that as he was once painting a horse he wished to represent the foam of his mouth in the picture, but he could not succeed in doing so, and he gave it up and threw the sponge at the picture with which he had wiped the colors from the painting. As soon, however, as it touched the picture it produced a good copy of the foam.

Nevertheless, we do not consider the Sceptic wholly undisturbed, but he is disturbed by some things that are inevitable. We confess that sometimes he is cold and thirsty, and that he suffers in such ways. But in these things even the ignorant are beset in two ways, from the feelings themselves, and not less also from the fact that they think these conditions are bad by nature. The Sceptic, however, escapes more easily, as he rejects the opinion that anything is in itself bad by nature. Therefore we say that the aim of the Sceptic is ἀταραξία in matters of opinion, and moderation of feeling in those things that are inevitable. Some notable Sceptics have added also suspension of judgment in investigation.





CHAPTER XIII


The General Method of Scepticism





It behooves us to explain how the suspension of judgment takes place. Speaking in general it takes place through placing things in opposition to each other. We either place phenomena in opposition to phenomena, or the intellectual in opposition to the intellectual, or reciprocally. For example, we place phenomena in opposition to phenomena when we say that this tower appears round from a distance but square nearby; the intellectual in opposition to the intellectual, when to the one who from the order of the heavens builds a tower of reasoning to prove that a providence exists, we oppose the fact that adversity often falls to the good and prosperity to the evil, and that therefore we draw the conclusion that there is no providence.

The intellectual is placed in opposition to phenomena, as when Anaxagoras opposed the fact that snow is white, by saying that snow is frozen water, and, as water is black, snow must also be black. Likewise we sometimes place the present in opposition to the present, similarly to the above-mentioned cases, and sometimes also the present in opposition to the past or the future. As for example, when someone proposes an argument to us that we cannot refute, we say to him, "Before the founder of the sect to which you belong was born, the argument which you propose in accordance with it had not appeared as a valid argument, but was dormant in nature, so in the same way it is possible that its refutation also exists in nature, but has not yet appeared to us, so that it is not at all necessary for us to agree with an argument that now seems to be strong." In order to make it clearer to us what we mean by these oppositions, I will proceed to give the Tropes, through which the suspension of judgment is produced, without asserting anything about their meaning or their number, because they may be unsound, or there may be more than I shall enumerate.





CHAPTER XIV


The Ten Tropes





Certain Tropes were commonly handed down by the older Sceptics. They are ten in number. The first is based upon the differences in animals; the second upon the differences in men; the third upon the difference in the constitution of the organs of sense; the fourth upon circumstances; the fifth upon position, distance, and place; the sixth upon mixtures; the seventh upon the quantity and constitution of objects; the eighth upon relation; the ninth upon frequency or rarity of occurrences; the tenth upon systems, customs, laws, mythical beliefs, and dogmatic opinions. We make this order ourselves. These Tropes come under three general heads: the standpoint of the judge, the standpoint of the thing judged, and the standpoint of both together. Under the standpoint of the judge come the first four, for the judge is either an animal, or a man, or a sense, and exists under certain circumstances. Under the standpoint of that which is judged, come the seventh and the tenth. Under the one composed of both together, come the fifth and the sixth, the eighth and the ninth. Again, these three divisions are included under the Trope of relation, because that is the most general one; it includes the three special divisions, and these in turn include the ten. We say these things in regard to their probable number, and we proceed in the following chapter to speak of their meaning.



THE FIRST TROPE



The first Trope, we said, is the one based upon the differences in animals, and according to this Trope, different animals do not get the same ideas of the same objects through the senses. This we conclude from the different origin of the animals, and also from the difference in the constitution of their bodies. In regard to the difference in origin, some animals originate without mixture of the sexes, while others originate through sexual intercourse. Of those which originate without intercourse of the sexes, some come from fire, as the little animals which appear in the chimneys, others from stagnant water, as mosquitoes, others from fermented wine, as the stinging ants, others from the earth, others from the mud, like the frogs, others from slime, as the worms, others from donkeys, as the beetles, others from cabbage, as caterpillars, others from fruit, as the gall insect from the wild figs, others from putrefied animals, as bees from bulls, and wasps from horses. Again, of those originating from intercourse of the sexes, some come from animals of the same kind, as in most cases, and others from those of different kinds, as mules.

Again, of animals in general, some are born alive, as men, others from eggs, as birds, and others are born a lump of flesh, as bears. It is probable therefore, that the inequalities and differences in origin cause great antipathies in the animals, and the result is incompatibility, discord, and conflict between the sensations of the different animals. Again, the differences in the principal parts of the body, especially in those fitted by nature to judge and to perceive, may cause the greatest differences in their ideas of objects, according to the differences in the animals themselves. As for example, those who have the jaundice call that yellow which appears to us white, and those who have bloodshot eyes call it blood-red. Accordingly, as some animals have yellow eyes, and others blood-shot ones, and still others whitish ones, and others eyes of other colors, it is probable, I think, that they have a different perception of colors. Furthermore, when we look steadily at the sun for a long time, and then look down at a book, the letters seem to us gold colored, and dance around. Now some animals have by nature a lustre in their eyes, and these emit a fine and sparkling light so that they see at night, and we may reasonably suppose that external things do not appear the same to them as to us. Jugglers by lightly rubbing the wick of the lamp with metal rust, or with the dark yellow fluid of the sepia, make those who are present appear now copper-colored and now black, according to the amount of the mixture used; if this be so it is much more reasonable to suppose that because of the mixture of different fluids in the eyes of animals, their ideas of objects would be different.

Furthermore, when we press the eye on the side, the figures, forms and sizes of things seen appear elongated and narrow. It is therefore probable that such animals as have the pupil oblique and long, as goats, cats, and similar animals, have ideas different from those of the animals which have a round pupil. Mirrors according to their different construction, sometimes show the external object smaller than reality, as concave ones, and sometimes long and narrow, as the convex ones do; others show the head of the one looking into it down, and the feet up.

As some of the vessels around the eye fall entirely outside the eye, on account of their protuberance, while others are more sunken, and still others are placed in an even surface, it is probable that for this reason also the ideas vary, and dogs, fishes, lions, men, and grasshoppers do not see the same things, either of the same size, or of similar form, but according to the impression on the organ of sight of each animal respectively.

The same thing is true in regard to the other senses; for how can it be said that shell-fish, birds of prey, animals covered with spines, those with feathers and those with scales would be affected in the same way by the sense of touch? and how can the sense of hearing perceive alike in animals which have the narrowest auditory passages, and in those that are furnished with the widest, or in those with hairy ears and those with smooth ones? For we, even, hear differently when we partially stop up the ears, from what we do when we use them naturally.

The sense of smell also varies according to differences in animals, since even our sense of smell is affected when we have taken cold and the phlegm is too abundant, and also when parts around our head are flooded with too much blood, for we then avoid odors that seem agreeable to others, and feel as if we were injured by them. Since also some of the animals are moist by nature and full of secretions, and others are very full of blood, and still others have either yellow or black bile prevalent and abundant, it is reasonable because of this to think that odorous things appear different to each one of them.

And it is the same in regard to things of taste, as some animals have the tongue rough and dry and others very moist. We too, when we have a dry tongue in fever, think that whatever we take is gritty, bad tasting, or bitter; and this we experience because of the varying degrees of the humors that are said to be in us. Since, then, different animals have different organs for taste, and a greater or less amount of the various humors, it can well be that they form different ideas of the same objects as regards their taste. For just as the same food on being absorbed becomes in some places veins, in other places arteries, and in other places bones, nerves, or other tissues, showing different power according to the difference of the parts receiving it; just as the same water absorbed by the trees becomes in some places bark, in other places branches, and in other places fruit, perhaps a fig or a pomegranate, or something else; just as the breath of the musician, one and the same when blown into the flute, becomes sometimes a high tone and sometimes a low one, and the same pressure of the hand upon the lyre sometimes causes a deep tone and sometimes a high tone, so it is natural to suppose that external objects are regarded differently according to the different constitution of the animals which perceive them.

We may see this more clearly in the things that are sought for and avoided by animals. For example, myrrh appears very agreeable to men and intolerable to beetles and bees. Oil also, which is useful to men, destroys wasps and bees if sprinkled on them; and sea-water, while it is unpleasant and poisonous to men if they drink it, is most agreeable and sweet to fishes. Swine also prefer to wash in vile filth rather than in pure clean water. Furthermore, some animals eat grass and some eat herbs; some live in the woods, others eat seeds; some are carnivorous, and others lactivorous; some enjoy putrefied food, and others fresh food; some raw food and others that which is prepared by cooking; and in general that which is agreeable to some is disagreeable and fatal to others, and should be avoided by them.

Thus hemlock makes the quail fat, and henbane the hogs, and these, as it is known, enjoy eating lizards; deer also eat poisonous animals, and swallows, the cantharidae. Moreover, ants and flying ants, when swallowed by men, cause discomfort and colic; but the bear, on the contrary, whatever sickness he may have, becomes stronger by devouring them. The viper is benumbed if one twig of the oak touches it, as is also the bat by a leaf of the plane-tree. The elephant flees before the ram, and the lion before the cock, and seals from the rattling of beans that are being pounded, and the tiger from the sound of the drum.

Many other examples could be given, but that we may not seem to dwell longer than is necessary on this subject, we conclude by saying that since the same things are pleasant to some and unpleasant to others, and the pleasure and displeasure depend on the ideas, it must be that different animals have different ideas of objects. And since the same things appear different according to the difference in the animals, it will be possible for us to say how the external object appears to us, but as to how it is in reality we shall suspend our judgment. For we cannot ourselves judge between our own ideas and those of other animals, being ourselves involved in the difference, and therefore much more in need of being judged than being ourselves able to judge.

And furthermore, we cannot give the preference to our own mental representations over those of other animals, either without evidence or with evidence, for besides the fact that perhaps there is no evidence, as we shall show, the evidence so called will be either manifest to us or not. If it is not manifest to us, then we cannot accept it with conviction; if it is manifest to us, since the question is in regard to what is manifest to animals, and we use as evidence that which is manifest to us who are animals, then it is to be questioned if it is true as it is manifest to us. It is absurd, however, to try to base the questionable on the questionable, because the same thing is to be believed and not to be believed, which is certainly impossible. The evidence is to be believed in so far as it will furnish a proof, and disbelieved in so far as it is itself to be proved. We shall therefore have no evidence according to which we can give preference to our own ideas over those of so-called irrational animals. Since therefore ideas differ according to the difference in animals, and it is impossible to judge them, it is necessary to suspend the judgment in regard to external objects.



HAVE THE SO-CALLED IRRATIONAL ANIMALS REASON?



We continue the comparison of the so-called irrational animals with man, although it is needless to do so, for in truth we do not refuse to hold up to ridicule the conceited and bragging Dogmatics, after having given the practical arguments. Now most of our number were accustomed to compare all the irrational animals together with man, but because the Dogmatics playing upon words say that the comparison is unequal, we carry our ridicule farther, although it is most superfluous to do so, and fix the discussion on one animal, as the dog, if it suits you, which seems to be the most contemptible animal; for we shall even then find that animals, about which we are speaking, are not inferior to us in respect to the trustworthiness of their perceptions.

Now the Dogmatics grant that this animal is superior to us in sense perception, for he perceives better through smell than we, as by this sense he tracks wild animals that he cannot see, and he sees them quicker with his eyes than we do, and he perceives them more acutely by hearing. Let us also consider reasoning, which is of two kinds, reasoning in thought and in speech. Let us look first to that of thought. This kind of reasoning, judging from the teachings of those Dogmatics who are now our greatest opponents, those of the Stoa, seems to fluctuate between the following things: the choice of the familiar, and avoidance of the alien; the knowledge of the arts that lead to this choice; and the comprehension of those virtues that belong to the individual nature, as regards the feelings. The dog then, upon whom it was decided to fix the argument as an example, makes a choice of things suitable to him, and avoids those that are harmful, for he hunts for food, but draws back when the whip is lifted up; he possesses also an art by which he procures the things that are suitable for him, the art of hunting. He is not also without virtue; since the true nature of justice is to give to every one according to his merit, as the dog wags his tail to those who belong to the family, and to those who behave well to him, guards them, and keeps off strangers and evil doers, he is surely not without justice.

Now if he has this virtue, since the virtues follow each other in turn, he has the other virtues also, which the wise men say, most men do not possess. We see the dog also brave in warding off attacks, and sagacious, as Homer testified when he represented Odysseus as unrecognised by all in his house, and recognised only by Argos, because the dog was not deceived by the physical change in the man. But according to Chrysippus even, who most attacked the irrational animals, the dog takes a part in the dialectic about which so much is said.

At any rate, the man above referred to said that the dog follows the fifth of the several non-apodictic syllogisms, for when he comes to a meeting of three roads, after seeking the scent in the two roads, through which his prey has not passed, he presses forward quickly in the third without scenting it. For the dog reasons in this way, potentially said the man of olden time; the animal passed through this, or this, or this; it was neither through this nor this, therefore it was through this. The dog also understands his own sufferings and mitigates them.

As soon as a sharp stick is thrust into him, he sets out to remove it, by rubbing his foot on the ground, as also with his teeth; and if ever he has a wound anywhere, for the reason that uncleansed wounds are difficult to cure, and those that are cleansed are easily cured, he gently wipes off the collected matter; and he observes the Hippocratic advice exceedingly well, for since quiet is a relief for the foot, if he has ever a wound in the foot, he lifts it up, and keeps it undisturbed as much as possible. When he is troubled by disturbing humours, he eats grass, with which he vomits up that which was unfitting, and recovers. Since therefore it has been shown that the animal that we fixed the argument upon for the sake of an example, chooses that which is suitable for him, and avoids what is harmful, and that he has an art by which he provides what is suitable, and that he comprehends his own sufferings and mitigates them, and that he is not without virtue, things in which perfection of reasoning in thought consists, so according to this it would seem that the dog has reached perfection. It is for this reason, it appears to me, that some philosophers have honoured themselves with the name of this animal. In regard to reasoning in speech, it is not necessary at present to bring the matter in question. For some of the Dogmatics, even, have put this aside, as opposing the acquisition of virtue, for which reason they practiced silence when studying. Besides, let it be supposed that a man is dumb, no one would say that he is consequently irrational.

However, aside from this, we see after all, that animals, about which we are speaking, do produce human sounds, as the jay and some others. Aside from this also, even if we do not understand the sounds of the so-called irrational animals, it is not at all unlikely that they converse, and that we do not understand their conversation. For when we hear the language of foreigners, we do not understand but it all seems like one sound to us. Furthermore, we hear dogs giving out one kind of sound when they are resisting someone, and another sound when they howl, and another when they are beaten, and a different kind when they wag their tails, and generally speaking, if one examines into this, he will find a great difference in the sounds of this and other animals under different circumstances; so that in all likelihood, it may be said that the so-called irrational animals partake also in spoken language. If then, they are not inferior to men in the accuracy of their perceptions, nor in reasoning in thought, nor in reasoning by speech, as it is superfluous to say, then they are not more untrustworthy than we are, it seems to me, in regard to their ideas. Perhaps it would be possible to prove this, should we direct the argument to each of the irrational animals in turn. As for example, who would not say that the birds are distinguished for shrewdness, and make use of articulate speech? for they not only know the present but the future, and this they augur to those that are able to understand it, audibly as well as in other ways. I have made this comparison superfluously, as I pointed out above, as I think I had sufficiently shown before, that we cannot consider our own ideas superior to those of the irrational animals. In short, if the irrational animals are not more untrustworthy than we in regard to the judgment of their ideas, and the ideas are different according to the difference in the animals, I shall be able to say how each object appears to me, but in regard to what it is by nature I shall be obliged to suspend my judgment.



THE SECOND TROPE



Such is the first Trope. The second, we said above, is based upon the differences in men. For even if one assent to the hypothesis that men are more trustworthy than the irrational animals, we shall find that doubt arises as soon as we consider our own differences. For since man is said to be composed of two things, soul and body, we differ from each other in respect to both of these things; for example, as regards the body, we differ both in form and personal peculiarities. For the body of a Scythian differs from the body of an Indian in form, the difference resulting, it is said, from the different control of the humors.

According to different control of the humors, differences in ideas arise also, as we represented under the first Trope. For this reason there is certainly a great difference among men in the choice and avoidance of external things. The Indians delight in different things from our own people, and the enjoyment of different things is a sign that different ideas are received of the external objects. We differ in personal peculiarities, as some digest beef better than the little fish from rocky places, and some are affected with purging by the weak wine of Lesbos.

There was, they say, an old woman in Attica who could drink thirty drachmas of hemlock without danger, and Lysis took four drachmas of opium unhurt, and Demophon, Alexander's table waiter, shivered when he was in the sun or in a hot bath, and felt warm in the shade; Athenagoras also, from Argos, did not suffer harm if stung by scorpions and venomous spiders; the so-called Psylli were not injured when bitten by snakes or by the aspis, and the Tentyrites among the Egyptians are not harmed by the crocodiles around them; those also of the Ethiopians who live on the Hydaspes river, opposite Meroe, eat scorpions and serpents, and similar things without danger; Rufinus in Chalcis could drink hellebore without vomiting or purging, and he enjoyed and digested it as something to which he was accustomed; Chrysermos, the Herophilian, ran the risk of stomach-ache if he ever took pepper, and Soterichus, the surgeon, was seized by purging if he perceived the odor of roasting shad; Andron, the Argive, was so free from thirst that he could travel even through the waterless Libya without looking for a drink; Tiberius, the emperor, saw in the dark, and Aristotle tells the story of a certain Thracian, who thought that he saw the figure of a man always going before him as a guide.

While therefore such a difference exists in men in regard to the body, and we must be satisfied with referring to a few only of the many examples given by the Dogmatics, it is probable that men also differ from each other in respect to the soul itself, for the body is a kind of type of the soul, as the physiognomical craft also shows.

The best example of the numerous and infinite differences of opinion among men is the contradiction in the sayings of the Dogmatics, not only about other things, but about what it is well to seek and to avoid. The poets have also fittingly spoken about this, for Pindar said—



"One delights in getting honors and crowns through storm-footed horses,

Another in passing life in rooms rich in gold,

Another still, safe travelling enjoys, in a swift ship, on a wave of the sea."



And the poet says—



"One man enjoys this, another enjoys that."



The tragedies also abound in such expressions, for instance, it is said—



"If to all, the same were good and wise,

Quarrels and disputes among men would not have been."



And again—



"It is awful indeed, that the same thing some mortals should please,

And by others be hated."



Since therefore the choice and the avoidance of things, depends on the pleasure and displeasure which they give, and the pleasure and displeasure have their seat in perception and ideas, when some choose the things that others avoid, it is logical for us to conclude that they are not acted upon similarly by the same things, for otherwise they would have chosen or avoided alike. Now if the same things act upon different men differently, on account of the difference in the men, for this cause also suspension of the judgment may reasonably be introduced, and we may perhaps say how each object appears to us, and what its individual differences are, but we shall not be able to declare what it is as to the nature of its essence.

For we must either believe all men or some men; but to believe all is to undertake an impossibility, and to accept things that are in opposition to each other. If we believe some only, let someone tell us with whom to agree, for the Platonist would say with Plato, the Epicurean with Epicurus, and others would advise in a corresponding manner; and so as they disagree, with no one to decide, they bring us round again to the suspension of judgment.

Furthermore, he who tells us to agree with the majority proposes something childish, as no one could go to all men and find out what pleases the majority, for it is possible that in some nations which we do not know the things which to us are rare are common to the majority, and those things which happen commonly to us are rare. As for example, it might happen that the majority should not suffer when bitten by venomous spiders, or that they should seldom feel pain, or have other personal peculiarities similar to those spoken of above. It is necessary therefore to suspend the judgment on account of the differences in men.



THE THIRD TROPE



While, however, the Dogmatics are conceited enough to think that they should be preferred to other men in the judgement of things, we know that their claim is absurd, for they themselves form a part of the disagreement; and if they give themselves preference in this way in the judgment of phenomena, they beg the question before they begin the judgment, as they trust the judgment to themselves. Nevertheless, in order that we should reach the result of the suspension of judgment by limiting the argument to one man, one who for example they deem to be wise, let us take up the third Trope. This is the one that is based upon differences in perception. That the perceptions differ from each other is evident. For example, paintings seem to have hollows and prominences to the sense of sight, but not to the sense of touch, and honey to the tongue of some people appears pleasant, but unpleasant to the eyes; therefore it is impossible to say whether it is really pleasant or unpleasant. In regard to myrrh it is the same, for it delights the sense of smell, but disgusts the sense of taste. Also in regard to euphorbium, since it is harmful to the eyes and harmless to all the rest of the body, we are not able to say whether it is really harmless to bodies or not, as far as its own nature is concerned. Rain-water, too, is useful to the eyes, but it makes the trachea and the lungs rough, just as oil does, although it soothes the skin; and the sea-torpedo placed on the extremities makes them numb, but is harmless when placed on the rest of the body.

Wherefore we cannot say what each of these things is by nature. It is possible only to say how it appears each time. We could cite more examples than these, but in order not to spend too long in laying out the plan of this book we shall simply say the following: Each of the phenomena perceived by us seems to present itself in many forms, as the apple, smooth, fragrant, sweet, yellow. Now it is not known whether it has in reality only those qualities which appear to us, or if it has only one quality, but appears different on account of the different constitution of the sense organs, or if it has more qualities than appear to us, but some of them do not affect us. That it has only one quality might be concluded from what we have said about the food distributed in bodies, and the water distributed in trees, and the breath in the flute and syrinx, and in similar instruments; for it is possible that the apple also has only one quality, but appears different on account of the difference in the sense organs by which it is perceived.

On the other hand, that the apple has more qualities than those that appear to us, can be argued in this way: Let us imagine someone born with the sense of touch, of smell, and of taste, but neither hearing nor seeing. He will then assume that neither anything visible nor anything audible exists at all, but only the three kinds of qualities which he can apprehend. It is possible then that as we have only the five senses, we apprehend only those qualities of the apple which we are able to grasp, but it may be supposed that other qualities exist which would affect other sense organs if we possessed them; as it is, we do not feel the sensations which would be felt through them. But nature, one will say, has brought the senses into harmony with the objects to be perceived.

What kind of nature? Among the Dogmatics a great difference of opinion reigns about the real existence of nature anyway; for he who decides whether there is a nature or not, if he is an uneducated man, would be according to them untrustworthy; if he is a philosopher, he is a part of the disagreement, and is himself to be judged, but is not a judge. In short, if it is possible that only those qualities exist in the apple which we seem to perceive, or that more than these are there, or that not even those which we perceive exist, it will be unknown to us what kind of a thing the apple is. The same argument holds for other objects of perception. If, however, the senses do not comprehend the external world, the intellect cannot comprehend it either, so that for this reason also it will appear that the suspension of judgment follows in regard to external objects.



THE FOURTH TROPE



This is the one based upon circumstances, and by circumstances we mean conditions. This Trope comes under consideration, we may say, with regard to conditions that are according to nature, or contrary to nature; such as waking or sleeping, the age of life, moving or keeping still, hating or loving, need or satiety, drunkenness or sobriety, predispositions, being courageous or afraid, sorrowing or rejoicing. For example, things appear different as they are according to nature, or contrary to it; as for instance, the insane and those inspired by a god, think that they hear gods, while we do not; in like manner they often say that they perceive the odor of storax or frankincense, or the like, and many other things which we do not perceive. Water, also, that seems lukewarm to us, if poured over places that are inflamed, will feel hot, and a garment that appears orange-coloured to those that have blood-shot eyes, would not look so to me, and the same honey appears sweet to me, but bitter to those who have the jaundice. If one should say that those who are not in a natural state have unusual ideas of objects, because of the intermingling of certain humors, then one must also say, that it may be that objects which are really what they seem to be to those who are in an unnatural condition, appear different to those who are in health, for even those who are in health have humors that are mixed with each other. For to give to one kind of fluid a power to change objects, and not to another kind, is a fiction of the mind; for just as those who are in health are in a condition that is natural to those who are in health, and contrary to the nature of those who are not in health, so also those who are not in health, are in a condition contrary to the nature of those in health, but natural to those not in health, and we must therefore believe that they also are in some respect in a natural condition.

Furthermore, in sleep or in waking, the ideas are different, because we do not see things in the same way when we are awake as we do in sleep; neither do we see them in the same way in sleep as we do when awake, so that the existence or non-existence of these things is not absolute, but relative, that is in relation to a sleeping or waking condition. It is therefore probable that we see those things in sleep which in a waking condition do not exist, but they are not altogether non-existent, for they exist in sleep, just as those things which exist when we are awake, exist, although they do not exist in sleep. Furthermore, things present themselves differently according to the age of life, for the same air seems cold to the aged, but temperate to those in their prime, and the same color appears dim to those who are old, and bright to those in their prime, and likewise the same tone seems faint to the former, and audible to the latter.

People in different ages are also differently disposed towards things to be chosen or avoided; children, for example, are very fond of balls and hoops, while those in their prime prefer other things, and the old still others, from which it follows that the ideas in regard to the same objects differ in different periods of life. Furthermore, things appear different in a condition of motion and rest, since that which we see at rest when we are still, seems to move when we are sailing by it. There are also differences which depend on liking or disliking, as some detest swine flesh exceedingly, but others eat it with pleasure. As Menander said—



"O how his face appears

Since he became such a man! What a creature!

Doing no injustice would make us also beautiful."



Many also that love ugly women consider them very beautiful Furthermore, there are differences which depend on hunger or satiety, as the same food seems agreeable to those who are hungry, and disagreeable to those who are satisfied. There are also differences depending on drunkenness and sobriety, as that which we consider ugly when we are sober does not appear ugly to us when we are drunk. Again, there are differences depending on predispositions, as the same wine appears sourish to those who have previously eaten dates or dried figs, but agreeable to those who have taken nuts or chickpeas; the vestibule of the bath warms those who enter from without, but cools those who go out, if they rest in it.

Furthermore, there are differences depending on being afraid or courageous, as the same thing seems fearful and terrible to the coward, but in no wise so to him who is brave. There are differences, also, depending on being sad or joyful, as the same things are unpleasant to the sad, but pleasant to the joyful. Since therefore the anomalies depending on conditions are so great, and since men are in different conditions at different times, it is perhaps easy to say how each object appears to each man, but not so of what kind it is, because the anomaly is not of a kind to be judged. For he who would pass judgment upon this is either in some one of the conditions mentioned above, or is in absolutely no condition whatever; but to say that he is in no condition at all, as, for example, that he is neither in health nor in illness, that he is neither moving nor quiet, that he is not of any age, and also that he is free from the other conditions, is wholly absurd. But if he judges the ideas while he is in any condition whatever, he is a part of the contradiction, and, besides, he is no genuine critic of external objects, because he is confused by the condition in which he finds himself. Therefore neither can the one who is awake compare the ideas of those who are asleep with those who are awake, nor can he who is in health compare the ideas of the sick with those of the well; for we believe more in the things that are present, and affecting us at present, than in the things not present.

In another way, the anomaly in such ideas is impossible to be judged, for whoever prefers one idea to another, and one condition to another, does this either without a criterion and a proof, or with a criterion and a proof; but he can do this neither without them, for he would then be untrustworthy, nor with them; for if he judges ideas, he judges them wholly by a criterion, and he will say that this criterion is either true or false. But if it is false, he will be untrustworthy; if, on the contrary, he says that it is true, he will say that the criterion is true either without proof or with proof. If without proof, he will be untrustworthy; if he says that it is true with proof, it is certainly necessary that the proof be true, or he will be untrustworthy. Now will he say that the proof which he has accepted for the accrediting of the criterion is true, having judged it, or without having judged it?

If he says so without judging it, he will be untrustworthy; if he has judged it, it is evident that he will say that he has judged according to some criterion, and we must seek a proof for this criterion, and for that proof a criterion. For the proof always needs a criterion to establish it, and the criterion needs a proof that it may be shown to be true; and a proof can neither be sound without a pre-existing criterion that is true, nor a criterion true without a proof that is shown beforehand to be trustworthy. And so both the criterion and the proof are thrown into the circulus in probando, by which it is found that they are both of them untrustworthy, for as each looks for proof from the other, each is as untrustworthy as the other. Since then one cannot prefer one idea to another, either without a proof and a criterion or with them, the ideas that differ according to different conditions cannot be judged, so that the suspension of judgment in regard to the nature of external objects follows through this Trope also.



THE FIFTH TROPE



The fifth Trope is that based upon position, distance, and place, for, according to each of these, the same things appear different, as for example, the same arcade seen from either end appears curtailed, but from the middle it looks symmetrical on every side; and the same ship appears small and motionless from afar, and large and in motion nearby, and the same tower appears round from a distance, but square nearby. So much for distance.

Now in reference to place, we say that the light of the lamp appears dim in the sun, but bright in the dark; and the same rudder appears broken in the sea, but straight out of it; and the egg in the bird is soft, but in the air hard; and the lyngurion is a fluid in the lynx, but is hard in the air; and the coral is soft in the sea, but hard in the air; and a tone of voice appears different produced by a syrinx, and by a flute, and different simply in the air. Also in reference to position, the same picture leaned back appears smooth, and leaned forward a little seems to have hollows and protuberances, and the necks of doves appear different in color according to the difference in inclination.

Since then all phenomena are seen in relation to place, distance, and position, each of which relation makes a great difference with the idea, as we have mentioned, we shall be obliged by this Trope also to come to the suspension of judgment. For he who wishes to give preference to certain ones of these ideas will attempt the impossible. For if he simply makes the decision without proof he will be untrustworthy. If, however, he wishes to make use of a proof, should he say that the proof is false, he contradicts himself, but if he declares the proof to be true, proof of its proof will be demanded of him, and another proof for that, which proof also must be true, and so on to the regressus in infinitum. It is impossible, however, to present proofs in infinitum, so that one will not be able to prove that one idea is to be preferred to another. Since then one cannot either without proof or with proof judge the ideas in question, the suspension of judgment results, and how each thing appears according to this or that position, or this or that distance, or this or that place, we perhaps are able to say, but what it really is it is impossible to declare, for the reasons which we have mentioned.



THE SIXTH TROPE



The sixth Trope is the one based upon mixtures, according to which we conclude that since no object presents itself alone, but always together with something else, it is perhaps possible to say of what nature the mixture is, of the thing itself, and of that with which it is seen, but of what sort the external object really is we shall not be able to say.

Now it is evident, I think, that nothing from without is known to us by itself, but always with something else, and that because of this fact it appears different. The color of our skin, for example, is different seen in warm air from what it is in cold, and we could not say what our color really is, only what it is when viewed under each of these conditions. The same sound appears different in rare air from what it is in dense, and aromas are more overpowering in the warm bath and in the sun than they are in the cold air, and a body surrounded by water is light, but by air heavy. Leaving aside, however, outer mixtures, our eyes have inside of them coatings and humors. Since then visible things are not seen without these, they will not be accurately comprehended, for it is the mixture that we perceive, and for this reason those who have the jaundice see everything yellow, and those with bloodshot eyes bloody.

Since the same sound appears different in broad open places from what it does in narrow and winding ones, and different in pure air and in impure, it is probable that we do not perceive the tones unmixed; for the ears have narrow winding passages filled with vaporous secretions, which it is said gather from places around the head.

Since also there are substances present in the nostrils and in the seat of the sense of taste, we perceive the things smelled and the things tasted in connection with them, and not unmixed. So that because of mixture the senses do not perceive accurately what the external objects are. The intellect even does not do this, chiefly because its guides, the senses, make mistakes, and perhaps it itself adds a certain special mixture to those messages communicated by the senses; for in each place where the Dogmatics think that the ruling faculty is situated, we see that certain humors are present, whether one would locate it in the region of the brain, in the region of the heart, or somewhere else. Since therefore according to this Trope also, we see that we cannot say anything regarding the nature of external objects, we are obliged to suspend our judgment.



THE SEVENTH TROPE



The seventh Trope is the one which, as we said, is based upon the quantity and constitution of objects, constitution commonly meaning composition. And it is evident that we are obliged to suspend our judgment according to this Trope also in regard to the nature of things. As for example, filings from the horn of the goat appear white when they are seen separately and without being put together; put together, however, in the form of a horn, they look black. And the parts of silver, the filings that is, by themselves appear black, but as a whole appear white; and parts of the Taenarus stone look white when ground, but in the whole stone appear yellow; grains of sand scattered apart from each other appear to be rough, but put together in a heap, they produce a soft feeling; hellebore taken fine and downy, causes choking, but it no longer does so when taken coarse; wine also taken moderately strengthens us, but when taken in excess relaxes the body; food similarly, has a different effect according to the quantity, at least, it often disturbs the body when too much is taken, causing dyspepsia and discharge. We shall be able here also to say of what kind the cutting from the horn is, and what many cuttings put together are, of what kind a filing of silver is, and what many of them put together are, of what kind the tiny Taenarus stone, and what one composed of many small ones is, and in regard to the grains of sand, and the hellebore, and the wine, and the food, what they are in relation, but no longer the nature of the thing by itself, because of the anomaly in the ideas which we have of things, according to the way in which they are put together. In general it appears that useful things become harmful when an intemperate use is made of them, and things that seem harmful when taken in excess, are not injurious in a small quantity. What we see in the effect of medicines witnesses especially to this fact, as an exact mixture of simple remedies makes a compound which is helpful, but sometimes when a very small inclination of the balance is overlooked, the medicine is not only not helpful, but very harmful, and often poisonous. So the argument based upon the quantity and constitution of objects, puts in confusion the existence of external objects. Therefore this Trope naturally leads us to suspend our judgment, as we are not able to declare exactly the nature of external objects.



THE EIGHTH TROPE



The eighth Trope is the one based upon relation, from which we conclude to suspend our judgment as to what things are absolutely, in their nature, since every thing is in relation to something else. And we must bear in mind that we use the word is incorrectly, in place of appears, meaning to say, every thing appears to be in relation. This is said, however, with two meanings: first, that every thing is in relation to the one who judges, for the external object, i.e. the thing judged, appears to be in relation to the judge; the other way is that every thing is in relation to the things considered together with it, as the relation of the right hand to the left. But we came to the conclusion above, that every thing is in relation to something, as for example, to the one judging; each thing appears in relation to this or that animal, and this or that man, and this or that sense, and in certain circumstances; as regards things considered together, also, each thing appears in relation to this or that mixture, and this or that Trope, and this or that composition, quantity and place. And in another way it is possible to conclude that every thing is in relation to something, as follows: does the being in difference differ from the being in relation, or not? If it does not differ, then it is the same as relation; if it does differ, since every thing which differs is in some relation, for it is said to be in relation to that from which it differs, those things which are in a difference are in a relation to something.

Now according to the Dogmatics, some beings belong to the highest genera, others to the lowest species, and others to both genera and species at the same time; all of these are in relation to something, therefore every thing is in relation to something. Furthermore, among things, some things are manifest, and others are hidden, as the Dogmatics themselves say, and the things that make themselves known to us are the phenomena, and the things that are made known to us by the phenomena are the hidden things, for according to the Dogmatics, the phenomena are the outward appearance of the unknown; then that which makes known, and that which is made known, are in relation to something; every thing, therefore, is in relation to something. In addition to this, some things are similar to each other, and others are dissimilar, some are equal, and others are unequal. Now these things are in relation to something, therefore every thing is in relation to something, and whoever says that every thing is not in relation to something, himself establishes the fact that every thing is in relation to something, for even in saying that every thing is not in relation to something, he proves it in reference to us, and not in general, by his objections to us. In short, as we have shown that every thing is in relation to something, it is then evident that we shall not be able to say exactly what each object is by nature, but what it appears to be like in relation to something else. It follows from this, that we must suspend our judgment regarding the nature of things.





THE NINTH TROPE



In regard to the Trope based on the frequency and rarity of events, which we call the ninth of the series, we give the following explanation: The sun is certainly a much more astonishing thing than a comet, but because we see the sun continually and the comet rarely we are so much astonished at the comet that it even seems an omen, while we are not at all astonished at the sun. If, however, we should imagine the sun appearing at rare intervals, and at rare intervals setting, in the first instance suddenly lighting up all things, and in the second casting everything into shade, we should see great astonishment at the sight. An earthquake, too, does not trouble those who experience it for the first time in the same manner as those who have become accustomed to it. How great the astonishment of a man who beholds the sea for the first time!

And the beauty of the human body, seen suddenly for the first time, moves us more than if we are accustomed to seeing it. That which is rare seems valuable, while things that are familiar and easily obtained seem by no means so. If, for example, we should imagine water as rare, of how much greater value would it seem than all other valuable things! or if we imagine gold as simply thrown about on the ground in large quantities like stones, to whom do we think it would be valuable, or by whom would it be hoarded, as it is now? Since then the same things according to the frequency or rarity that they are met with seem to be now valuable and now not so, we conclude that it may be that we shall be able to say what kind of a thing each of them appears to be according to the frequency or rarity with which it occurs, but we are not able to say what each external object is absolutely. Therefore, according to this Trope also, we suspend our judgment regarding these things.



THE TENTH TROPE



The tenth Trope is the one principally connected with morals, relating to schools, customs, laws, mythical beliefs, and dogmatic opinions. Now a school is a choice of a manner of life, or of something held by one or many, as for example the school of Diogenes or the Laconians. A law is a written contract among citizens, the transgressor of which is punished. A custom or habit, for there is no difference, is a common acceptance of a certain thing by many, the deviator from which is in no wise punished. For example, it is a law not to commit adultery. A mythical belief is a tradition regarding things which never took place, but were invented, as among others, the tales about Cronus, for many are led to believe them. A dogmatic opinion is the acceptance of something that seems to be established by a course of reasoning, or by some proof, as for example, that atoms are elements of things, and that they are either homogeneous, or infinitesimal, or of some other description. Now we place each of these things sometimes in opposition to itself, and sometimes in opposition to each one of the others. For example, we place a custom in opposition to a custom thus: some of the Ethiopians tattoo new-born children, but we do not, and the Persians think it is seemly to have a garment of many colors and reaching to the feet, but we think it not so. Most other nations consider it a shame. We place a law in opposition to a law in this way: among the Romans he who renounces his paternal inheritance does not pay his father's debts, but among the Rhodians he pays them in any case; and among the Tauri in Scythia it was a law to offer strangers in sacrifice to Artemis, but with us it is forbidden to kill a man near a temple. We place a school in opposition to a school when we oppose the school of Diogenes to that of Aristippus, or that of the Laconians to that of the Italians. We place a mythical belief in opposition to a mythical belief, as by some traditions Jupiter is said to be the father of men and gods, and by others Oceanus, as we say—



"Oceanus father of the gods, and Tethys the mother."



We place dogmatic opinions in opposition to each other, when we say that some declare that there is only one element, but others that they are infinite in number, and some that the soul is mortal, others that it is immortal; and some say that our affairs are directed by the providence of the gods, but others that there is no providence.

We place a custom in opposition to a mythical belief, as when the myths say that Cronus ate his own children, while with us it is the custom to take care of our children; and among us it is the custom to venerate the gods as good, and not liable to evil, but they are described by the poets as being wounded, and also as being jealous of each other. We place a custom in opposition to a dogmatic opinion when we say that it is a custom with us to seek good things from the gods, but that Epicurus says that the divine pays no heed to us; Aristippus also held it to be a matter of indifference to wear a woman's robe, but we consider it shameful. We place a school in opposition to a law, as according to the law it is not allowed to beat a free and noble born man, but the wrestlers and boxers strike each other according to the teaching of their manner of life, and although murder is forbidden, the gladiators kill each other for the same reason. We place a mythical belief in opposition to a school when we say that, although the myths say of Hercules that in company with Omphale—



"He carded wool, and bore servitude"



and did things that not even an ordinary good man would have done, yet Hercules' theory of life was noble. We place a mythical belief in opposition to a dogmatic opinion when we say that athletes seeking after glory as a good, enter for its sake upon a laborious profession, but many philosophers, on the other hand, teach that glory is worthless. We place law in opposition to mythical belief when we say the poets represent the gods as working adultery and sin, but among us the law forbids those things. We place law in opposition to dogmatic opinion when we say that the followers of Chrysippus hold that it is a matter of indifference to marry one's mother or sister, but the law forbids these things.

We place a mythical belief in opposition to a dogmatic opinion when we say that the poets represent Jupiter as descending and holding intercourse with mortal women, but the Dogmatics think this was impossible; also that the poet says that Jupiter, on account of his sorrow for Sarpedon, rained drops of blood upon the earth, but it is a dogma of the philosophers that the divine is exempt from suffering; and they deny the myth of the horse-centaurs, giving us the horse-centaur as an example of non-existence. Now we could give many other examples of each of the antitheses mentioned above, but for a brief argument, these are sufficient. Since, however, such anomaly of things is shown by this Trope also, we shall not be able to say what objects are by nature, but only what each thing appears to be like, according to this or that school, or this or that law, or this or that custom, or according to each of the other conditions. Therefore, by this Trope also, we must suspend our judgment in regard to the nature of external objects. Thus we arrive at ἐποχή through the ten Tropes.





CHAPTER XV


The Five Tropes





The later Sceptics, however, teach the following five Tropes: first, the one based upon contradiction; second, the regressus in infinitum; third, relation; fourth, the hypothetical; fifth, the circulus in probando.

The one based upon contradiction is the one from which we find, that in reference to the thing put before us for investigation, a position has been developed which is impossible to be judged, either practically, or theoretically, and therefore, as we are not able to either accept or reject anything, we end in suspending the judgment.

The one based upon the regressus in infinitum is that in which we say that the proof brought forward for the thing set before us calls for another proof, and that one another, and so on to infinity, so that, not having anything from which to begin the reasoning, the suspension of judgment follows.

The one based upon relation, as we have said before, is that one in which the object appears of this kind or that kind, as related to the judge and to the things regarded together with it, but we suspend our judgment as to what it is in reality. The one based upon hypothesis is illustrated by the Dogmatics, when in the regressus in infinitum they begin from something that they do not found on reason, but which they simply take for granted without proof.

The Trope, circulus in probando, arises when the thing which ought to prove the thing sought for, needs to be sustained by the thing sought for, and as we are unable to take the one for the proof of the other, we suspend our judgment in regard to both. Now we shall briefly show that it is possible to refer every thing under investigation to one or another of these Tropes, as follows: the thing before us is either sensible or intellectual; difference of opinion exists, however, as to what it is in itself, for some say that only the things of sense are true, others, only those belonging to the understanding, and others say that some things of sense, and some of thought, are true. Now, will it be said that this difference of opinion can be judged or cannot be judged?

If it cannot be judged, then we have the result necessarily of suspension of judgment, because it is impossible to express opinion in regard to things about which a difference of opinion exists which cannot be judged. If it can be judged, then we ask how it is to be judged? For example, the sensible, for we shall limit the argument first to this—Is it to be judged by sensible or by intellectual standards? For if it is to be judged by a sensible one, since we are in doubt about the sensible, that will also need something else to sustain it; and if that proof is also something sensible, something else will again be necessary to prove it, and so on in infinitum.

If, on the contrary, the sensible must be judged by something intellectual, as there is disagreement in regard to the intellectual, this intellectual thing will require also judgment and proof. Now, how is it to be proved? If by something intellectual, it will likewise be thrown into infinitum; if by something sensible, as the intellectual has been taken for the proof of the sensible, and the sensible has been taken for that of the intellectual, the circulus in probando is introduced.

If, however, in order to escape from this, the one who is speaking to us expects us to take something for granted which has not been proved, in order to prove what follows, the hypothetical Trope is introduced, which provides no way of escape. For if the one who makes the hypothesis is worthy of confidence, we should in every case be no less worthy of confidence in making a contrary hypothesis. If the one who makes the assumption assumes something true, he makes it suspicious by using it as a hypothesis, and not as an established fact; if it is false, the foundation of the reasoning is unsound. If a hypothesis is any help towards a trustworthy result, let the thing in question itself be assumed, and not something else, by which, forsooth, one would establish the thing under discussion. If it is absurd to assume the thing questioned, it is also absurd to assume that upon which it rests. That all things belonging to the senses are also in relation to something else is evident, because they are in relation to those who perceive them. It is clear then, that whatever thing of sense is brought before us, it may be easily referred to one of the five Tropes.

And we come to a similar conclusion in regard to intellectual things. For if it should be said that there is a difference of opinion regarding them which cannot be judged, it will be granted that we must suspend the judgment concerning it. In case the difference of opinion can be judged, if it is judged through anything intellectual, we fall into the regressus in infinitum, and if through anything sensible into the circulus in probando; for, as the sensible is again subject to difference of opinion, and cannot be judged by the sensible on account of the regressus in infinitum, it will have need of the intellectual, just as the intellectual has need of the sensible. But he who accepts anything which is hypothetical again is absurd. Intellectual things stand also in relation, because the form in which they are expressed depends on the mind of the thinker, and, if they were in reality exactly as they are described, there would not have been any difference of opinion about them.

Therefore the intellectual also is brought under the five Tropes, and consequently it is necessary to suspend the judgment altogether with regard to every thing that is brought before us. Such are the five Tropes taught by the later Sceptics. They set them forth, not to throw out the ten Tropes, but in order to put to shame the audacity of the Dogmatics in a variety of ways, by these Tropes as well as by those.





CHAPTER XVI


The Two Tropes





Two other Tropes are also taught. For as it appears that everything that is comprehended is either comprehended through itself or through something else, it is thought that this fact introduces doubt in regard to all things. And that nothing can be understood through itself is evident, it is said, from the disagreement which exists altogether among the physicists in regard to sensible and intellectual things. I mean, of course, a disagreement which cannot be judged, as we are not able to use a sensible or an intellectual criterion in judging it, for everything that we would take has a part in the disagreement, and is untrustworthy. Nor is it conceded that anything can be comprehended through something else; for if a thing is comprehended through something, that must always in turn be comprehended through something else, and the regressus in infinitum or the circulus in probando follow. If, on the contrary, a thing is comprehended through something that one wishes to use as if it had been comprehended through itself, this is opposed to the fact that nothing can be comprehended through itself, according to what we have said. We do not know how that which contradicts itself can be comprehended, either through itself or through something else, as no criterion of the truth or of comprehension appears, and signs without proof would be rejected, as we shall see in the next book. So much will suffice for the present about suspension of judgment.





CHAPTER XVII


What are the Tropes for the overturning of Aetiology?





In the same manner as we teach the Tropes, some set forth Tropes through which we oppose the Dogmatics, by expressing doubt in regard to the aetiology of which they are especially proud. So Aenesidemus teaches eight Tropes, by which he thinks that he can prove all the dogmatic aetiology useless.

The first of these Tropes, he said, relates to the character of aetiology in general, which does not give incontestable testimony in regard to phenomena, because it treats of unseen things. The second Trope states that although abundant resources exist by which to investigate the cause of a thing in question, some Dogmatics investigate it in one way only.

The third Trope states that the Dogmatics assign causes which do not show any order for things which have taken place in an orderly manner. The fourth Trope states that the Dogmatics, accepting phenomena as they take place, think that they also understand how unseen things take place, although perhaps the unseen things have taken place in the same way as the phenomena, and perhaps in some other way peculiar to themselves. The fifth Trope states that they all, so to speak, assign causes according to their own hypotheses about the elements, but not according to any commonly accepted methods.

The sixth states that they often explain things investigated according to their own hypotheses, but ignore opposing hypotheses which have equal probability. The seventh states that they often give reasons for things that not only conflict with phenomena, but also with their own hypotheses. The eighth states that although that which seems manifest, and that which is to be investigated, are often equally inscrutable, they build up a theory from the one about the other, although both are equally inscrutable. It is not impossible, Aenesidemus said also, that some Dogmatics should fail in their theories of causality from other combinations of reasons deducible from the Tropes given above. Perhaps also the five Tropes are sufficient to refute aetiology, for he who proposes a cause will propose one which is either in harmony with all the sects of philosophy, with Scepticism, and with phenomena, or one that is not. Perhaps, however, it is not possible that a cause should be in harmony with them, for phenomena and unknown things altogether disagree with each other.

If it is not in harmony with them, the reason of this will also be demanded of the one who proposed it; and if he accepts a phenomenon as the cause of a phenomenon, or something unknown as the cause of the unknown, he will be thrown into the regressus in infinitum; if he uses one cause to account for another one, into the circulus in probando; but if he stops anywhere, he will either say that the cause that he proposes holds good so far as regards the things that have been said, and introduce relation, abolishing an absolute standpoint; or if he accepts anything by hypothesis, he will be attacked by us. Therefore it is perhaps possible to put the temerity of the Dogmatics to shame in aetiology by these Tropes.





CHAPTER XVIII


The Sceptical Formulae





When we use any one of these Tropes, or the Tropes of ἐποχή, we employ with them certain formulae which show the Sceptical method and our own feeling, as for instance, the sayings, "No more," "One must determine nothing," and certain others. It is fitting therefore to treat of these in this place. Let us begin with "No more."





CHAPTER XIX


The Formula "No more."





We sometimes express this as I have given it, and sometimes thus, "Nothing more." For we do not accept the "No more," as some understand it, for the examination of the special, and "Nothing more" for that of the general, but we use "No more" and "Nothing more" without any difference, and we shall at present treat of them as one and the same expression.

Now this formula is defective, for as when we say a double one we really mean a double garment, and when we say a broad one we really mean a broad road; so when we say "No more" we mean really no more than this, or in every way the same. But some of the Sceptics use instead of the interrogation "No?" the interrogation "What, this rather than this?" using the word "what" in the sense of "what is the reason," so that the formula means, "What is the reason for this rather than for this?" It is a customary thing, however, to use an interrogation instead of a statement, as "Who of the mortals does not know the wife of Jupiter?" and also to use a statement instead of an interrogation, as "I seek where Dion dwells," and "I ask why one should admire a poet." The word "what" is also used instead of "what for" by Menander—"(For) what did I remain behind?"

The formula "Not more this than this" expresses our own condition of mind, and signifies that because of the equality of the things that are opposed to each other we finally attain to a state of equilibrium of soul. We mean by equality that equality which appears to us as probable, by things placed in opposition to each other we mean simply things which conflict with each other, and by a state of equilibrium we mean a state in which we do not assent to one thing more than to another. Even if the formula "Nothing more" seems to express assent or denial, we do not use it so, but we use it loosely, and not with accuracy, either instead of an interrogation or instead of saying, "I do not know to which of these I would assent, and to which I would not." What lies before us is to express what appears to us, but we are indifferent to the words by which we express it. This must be understood, however, that we use the formula "Nothing more" without affirming in regard to it that it is wholly sure and true, but we present it as it appears to us.





CHAPTER XX


Aphasia





We explain Aphasia as follows. According to the general signification, it expresses affirmation or negation, as "It is day" or "It is not day"; according to the special signification, it expresses an affirmation only. Now Aphasia comprises both affirmation and negation. It follows that Aphasia is a condition of mind, according to which we say that we neither affirm nor deny anything. It is evident from this that we do not understand by Aphasia something that inevitably results from the nature of things, but we mean that we now find ourselves in the condition of mind expressed by it in regard to the things that are under investigation. It is necessary to remember that we do not say that we affirm or deny any of those things that are dogmatically stated in regard to the unknown, for we yield assent only to those things which affect our feelings and oblige us to assent to them.





CHAPTER XXI


"Perhaps," and "It is possible," and "It may be."





The formulae "Perhaps," and "Perhaps not," and "It is possible," and "It is not possible," and "It may be," and "It may not be," we use instead of "Perhaps it is," and "Perhaps it is not," and "It is possible that it is," and "It is possible that it is not," and "It may be that it is," and "It may be that it is not." That is, we use the formula "It is not possible" for the sake of brevity, instead of saying "It is not possible to be," and "It may not be" instead of "It may not be that it is," and "Perhaps not" instead of "Perhaps it is not." Again, we do not here dispute about words, neither do we question if the formulae mean these things absolutely, but we use them loosely, as I said before. Yet I think it is evident that these formulae express Aphasia. For certainly the formula "Perhaps it is" really includes that which seems to contradict it, i.e. the formula "Perhaps it is not," because it does not affirm in in regard to anything that it is really so. It is the same also in regard to the others.





CHAPTER XXII


The Suspension of Judgment





When I say that I suspend my judgment, I mean that I cannot say which of those things presented should be believed, and which should not be believed, showing that things appear equal to me in respect to trustworthiness and untrustworthiness. Now we do not affirm that they are equal, but we state what appears to us in regard to them at the time when they present themselves to us. ἐποχή means the holding back of the opinion, so as neither to affirm nor deny anything because of the equality of the things in question.





CHAPTER XXIII


The Formula "I determine Nothing."





In regard to the formula "I determine nothing," we say the following: By "determine" we mean, not simply to speak, but to give assent to an affirmation with regard to some unknown thing. For it will soon be found that the Sceptic determines nothing, not even the formula "I determine nothing," for this formula is not a dogmatic opinion, that is an assent to something unknown, but an expression declaring what our condition of mind is. When, for example, the Sceptic says, "I determine nothing," he means this: "According to my present feeling I can assert or deny nothing dogmatically regarding the things under investigation," and in saying this he expresses what appears to him in reference to the things under discussion. He does not express himself positively, but he states what he feels.





CHAPTER XXIV


The Formula "Every thing is Undetermined."





The expression "Indetermination" furthermore shows a state of mind in which we neither deny nor affirm positively anything regarding things that are investigated in a dogmatic way, that is the things that are unknown. When then the Sceptic says "Every thing is undetermined," he uses "is undetermined," in the sense of "it appears undetermined to him." The words "every thing" do not mean all existences, but those that he has examined of the unknown things that are investigated by the Dogmatists. By "undetermined," he means that there is no preference in the things that are placed in opposition to each other, or that they simply conflict with each other in respect to trustworthiness or untrustworthiness. And as the one who says "I am walking" really means "It is I that am walking," so he who says "Every thing is undetermined" means at the same time, according to our teachings, "as far as I am concerned," or "as it appears to me," as if he were saying "As far as I have examined the things that are under investigation in a dogmatic manner, it appears to me that no one of them excels the one which conflicts with it in trustworthiness or untrustworthiness."





CHAPTER XXV


The Formula "Every thing is Incomprehensible."





We treat the formula "Every thing is incomprehensible" in the same way. For "every thing" we interpret in the same way as above, and we supply the words "to me" so that what we say is this: "As far as I have inspected the unknown things which are dogmatically examined, it appears to me that every thing is incomprehensible." This is not, however, to affirm that the things which are examined by the Dogmatists are of such a nature as to be necessarily incomprehensible, but one expresses his own feeling in saying "I see that I have not thus far comprehended any of those things because of the equilibrium of the things that are placed in opposition to each other." Whence it seems to me that every thing that has been brought forward to dispute our formulae has fallen wide of the mark.





CHAPTER XXVI


The Formulae





"I do not comprehend" and "I do not understand."



The formulae "I do not comprehend" and "I do not understand" show a condition of mind in which the Sceptic stands aloof for the present from asserting or denying anything in regard to the unknown things under investigation, as is evident from what we said before about the other formulae.





CHAPTER XXVII


The Formula





"To place an equal Statement in opposition to every Statement."



Furthermore, when we say "Every statement may have an equal statement placed in opposition to it," by "every," we mean all the statements that we have examined; we do not use the word "statement" simply, but for a statement which seeks to prove something dogmatically about things that are unknown, and not at all one that shows a process of reasoning from premises and conclusions, but something which is put together in any sort of way. We use the word "equal" in reference to trustworthiness or untrustworthiness. "Is placed in opposition" we use instead of the common expression "to conflict with," and we supply "as it appears to me." When therefore one says, "It seems to me that every statement which I have examined, which proves something dogmatically, may have another statement placed in opposition to it which also proves something dogmatically, and which is equal to it in trustworthiness and untrustworthiness," this is not asserted dogmatically, but is an expression of human feeling as it appears to the one who feels it. Some Sceptics express the formula as follows: "Every statement should have an equal one placed in opposition to it," demanding it authoritatively thus: "Let us place in opposition to every statement that proves something dogmatically another conflicting statement which also seeks to prove something dogmatically, and is equal to it in trustworthiness and untrustworthiness." Naturally this is directed to the Sceptics, but the infinitive should be used instead of the imperative, that is, "to oppose" instead of "let us oppose."





CHAPTER XXVIII


General Observations on the Formulae of the Sceptics





We have treated of a sufficient number of these formulae for an outline, especially since what we have said about those mentioned applies also to others that we have omitted. In regard to all the Sceptical formulae, it must be understood in advance that we do not affirm them to be absolutely true, because we say that they can even refute themselves, since they are themselves included in those things to which they refer, just as cathartic medicines not only purge the body of humors, but carry off themselves with the humors.

We say then that we use these formulae, not as literally making known the things for which they are used, but loosely, and if one wishes, inaccurately. It is not fitting for the Sceptic to dispute about words, especially as it contributes to our purpose to say that these formulae have no absolute meaning; their meaning is a relative one, that is, relative to the Sceptics. Besides, it is to be remembered that we do not say them about all things in general, but about the unknown, and things that are dogmatically investigated, and that we say what appears to us, and that we do not express ourselves decidedly about the nature of external objects. By this means I think that every sophism brought against the Sceptical formulae can be overturned. We have now shown the character of Scepticism by examining its idea, its parts, its criterion and aim, and also the Tropes of ἐποχή, and by treating of the Sceptical formulae. We think it therefore appropriate to enter briefly into the distinction between Scepticism and the nearly related schools of philosophy in order to more clearly understand the Sceptical School. We will begin with the philosophy of Heraclitus.





CHAPTER XXIX


In what does the Sceptical School differ from the Philosophy of Heraclitus?





Now that this school differs from ours is evident, for Heraclitus expresses himself about many unknown things dogmatically, which we do not, as has been said. Aenesidemus and his followers said that the Sceptical School is the way to the philosophy of Heraclitus. They gave as a reason for this that the statement that contradictory predicates appear to be applicable to the same thing, leads the way to the statement that contradictory predicates are in reality applicable to the same thing; and as the Sceptics say that contradictory predicates appear to be applicable to the same thing, the Heraclitans proceed from this to the doctrine that such predicates are in reality applicable. We reply to this that the statement that contradictory predicates appear to be applicable to the same thing is not a dogma of the Sceptics, but is a fact that presents itself not only to the Sceptics, but to other philosophers, and to all men. No one, for instance, would venture to say that honey does not taste sweet to those in health, and bitter to those who have the jaundice, so that the Heraclitans start from a preconception common to all men, as do we also, and perhaps the other schools of philosophy likewise.

If, however, they had attributed the origin of the statement that contradictory predicates are present in the same thing to any of the Sceptical teachings, as, for example, to the formula "Every thing is incomprehensible," or "I determine nothing," or any of the other similar ones, it may be that which they say would follow; but since they start from that which is a common experience, not only to us, but to other philosophers, and in life, why should one say that our school is a path to the philosophy of Heraclitus more than any of the other schools of philosophy, or than life itself, as we all make use of the same subject matter? On the other hand, the Sceptical School may not only fail to help towards the knowledge of the philosophy of Heraclitus, but may even hinder it!

For the Sceptic attacks all the dogmas of Heraclitus as having been rashly given, and opposes on the one hand the doctrine of conflagration, and on the other, the doctrine that contradictory predicates in reality apply to the same thing, and in regard to every dogma of Heraclitus he scorns his dogmatic rashness, and then, in the manner that I have before referred to, adduces the formulae "I do not understand" and "I determine nothing," which conflict with the Heraclitan doctrines. It is absurd to say that this conflicting school is a path to the very sect with which it conflicts. It is then absurd to say that the Sceptical School is a path to the philosophy of Heraclitus.





CHAPTER XXX


In what does the Sceptical School differ from the Philosophy of Democritus?





The philosophy of Democritus is also said to have community with Scepticism, because it seems to use the same matter that we do. For, from the fact that honey seems sweet to some and bitter to others, Democritus reasons, it is said, that honey is neither sweet nor bitter, and therefore he accords with the formula "No more," which is a formula of the Sceptics. But the Sceptics and the Democritans use the formula "No more" differently from each other, for they emphasise the negation in the expression, but we, the not knowing whether both of the phenomena exist or neither one, and so we differ in this respect. The distinction, however, becomes most evident when Democritus says that atoms and empty space are real, for by real he means existing in reality. Now, although he begins with the anomaly in phenomena, yet, since he says that atoms and empty space really exist, it is superfluous, I think, even to say that he differs from us.





CHAPTER XXXI


In what does Scepticism differ from the Cyrenaic Philosophy?





Some say that the Cyrenaic School is the same as the Sceptical, because that school also claims to comprehend only conditions of mind. It differs, however, from it, because, while the former makes pleasure and the gentle motion of the flesh its aim, this is opposed to the aim of their school. For whether pleasure is present or not, confusion awaits him who maintains that pleasure is an aim, as I have shown in what I said about the aim. And then, in addition, we suspend our judgment as far as the reasoning with regard to external objects is concerned, but the Cyrenaics pronounce the nature of these inscrutable.





CHAPTER XXXII


In what does Scepticism differ from the Philosophy of Protagoras?





Protagoras makes man the measure of all things, of things that are that they are, and things that are not that they are not, meaning by measure, criterion, and by things, events, that is to say really, man is the criterion for all events, of things that are that they are, and of things that are not that they are not. And for that reason he accepts only the phenomena that appear to each man, and thus he introduces relation. Therefore he seems to have community with the Pyrrhoneans. He differs, however, from them, and we shall see the difference after we have somewhat explained how things seemed to Protagoras. He says, for example, that matter is fluid, and as it flows, additions are constantly made in the place of that which is carried away; the perceptions also are arranged anew and changed, according to the age and according to other conditions of the body.

He says also, that the reasons of all phenomena are present in matter, so that matter can be all that it appears to be to all men as far as its power is concerned. Men, however, apprehend differently at different times, according to the different conditions that they are in; for he that is in a natural condition will apprehend those qualities in matter that can appear to those who are in a natural condition, while on the contrary, those who are in an unnatural condition will apprehend those qualities that can appear to the abnormal. Furthermore, the same reasoning would hold true in regard to differences in age, to sleeping and waking, and each of the other different conditions. Therefore man becomes the criterion of things that are, for all things that appear to men exist for men, and those things that do not appear to any one among men do not exist. We see that he dogmatizes in saying that matter is fluid, and also in saying that the reasons for all phenomena have their foundation in matter, while these things are unknown, and to us are things regarding which we suspend our judgment.





CHAPTER XXXIII


In what does Scepticism differ from the Academic Philosophy?





Some say further that the Academic philosophy is the same as Scepticism, therefore it seems appropriate to me to treat of that also. There have been, as the most say, three Academies—the most ancient one, that of Plato and his followers; the second and middle one, that of Arcesilaus and his followers, Arcesilaus being the pupil of Polemo; the third and new Academy, that of Carneades and Clitomachus and their followers; some add also a fourth, that of Philo and Charmides, and their followers; and some count even a fifth, that of Antiochus and his followers. Beginning then from the old Academy, let us consider the difference between the schools of philosophy mentioned. Now some have said that Plato was a Dogmatic, others that he was a Sceptic, and others that he was in some things a Sceptic and in some things a Dogmatic. For in the fencing dialogues, where Socrates is introduced as either making sport of someone or contending against the Sophists, Plato has, they say, a fencing and sceptical character, but he is dogmatic when he expresses himself seriously, either through Socrates or Timaeus or any such person. In regard to those who say that he is a Dogmatic, or a Dogmatic in some things and a Sceptic in others, it would be superfluous, it seems to me, to speak now, for they themselves grant that he is different from us.

The question as to whether he was really a Sceptic or not we treat more fully in the Memoranda, but here we state briefly that according to Menodotus and Aenesidemus (for these especially defended this position) Plato dogmatizes when he expresses himself regarding ideas, and regarding the existence of Providence, and when he states that the virtuous life is more to be chosen than the one of vice. If he assents to these things as true, he dogmatizes; or even if he accepts them as more probable than otherwise he departs from the sceptical character, since he gives a preference to one thing above another in trustworthiness or untrustworthiness; for how foreign this is to us is evident from what we have said before. Even if when he performs mental gymnastics, as they say, he expresses some things sceptically, he is not because of this a Sceptic. For he who dogmatizes about one thing, or, in short, gives preference to one mental image over another in trustworthiness or untrustworthiness in respect to anything that is unknown, is a Dogmatic in character, as Timon shows by what he said of Xenophanes. For after having praised Xenophanes in many things, and even after having dedicated his Satires to him, he made him mourn and say—



"Would that I also might gain that mind profound,

Able to look both ways. In a treacherous path have I been decoyed,

And still in old age am with all wisdom unwed.

For wherever I turned my view

All things were resolved into unity; all things, always

From all sources drawn, were merged into nature the same."



Timon calls him somewhat, but not entirely, free from vanity, when he said—



"Xenophanes somewhat free from vanity, mocker of Homeric deceit,

Far from men he conceived a god, on all sides equal,

Above pain, a being spiritualized, or intellect."



In saying that he was somewhat free from vanity, he meant that he was in some things free from vanity. He called him a mocker of the Homeric deceit because he had scoffed at the deceit in Homer. Xenophanes also dogmatized, contrary to the assumptions of other men, that all things are one, and that God is grown together with all things, that He is spherical, insensible, unchangeable, and reasonable, whence the difference of Xenophanes from us is easily proved. In short, from what has been said, it is evident that although Plato expresses doubt about some things, so long as he has expressed himself in certain places in regard to the existence of unknown things, or as preferring some things to others in trustworthiness, he cannot be, it seems to me, a Sceptic.

Those of the New Academy, although they say that all things are incomprehensible, differ from the Sceptics, perhaps even in saying that all things are incomprehensible (for they assert decidedly in regard to this, but the Sceptic thinks it possible that some things may be comprehended), but they differ evidently still further from us in their judgment of good and evil. For the Academicians say that there is such a thing as good and evil, not as we say it, but more with the conviction that that which they call good exists than that it does not; and likewise in regard to the evil, while we do not say anything is good or evil with the conviction that it is probably so, but we live our lives in an unprejudiced way in order not to be inactive. Moreover, we say that our ideas are equal to each other in trustworthiness and untrustworthiness, as far as their nature goes, while they say that some are probable and others improbable. They make a difference also between the improbable ones, for they believe that some of them are only probable, others probable and undisputed, still others probable, undisputed, and tested.

As for example, when a coiled rope is lying in a somewhat dark room, he who comes in suddenly gets only a probable idea of it, and thinks that it is a serpent; but it appears to be a rope to him who has looked carefully around, and found out that it does not move, and that it is of such a color, and so on, according to an idea which is probable and undisputed. The tested idea is like this: It is said that Hercules led Alcestis after she was dead back again from Hades and showed her to Admetus, and he received an idea that was probable and undisputed regarding Alcestis. As, however, he knew that she was dead, his mind drew back from belief and inclined to disbelief. Now those belonging to the New Academy prefer the idea which is probable and undisputed to the simply probable one. To both of these, however, they prefer that which is probable, undisputed, and tested. If, however, both those of the Academy and the Sceptics say that they believe certain things, there is an evident difference between the two schools of philosophy even in this; for "to believe" is used in a different sense, meaning, on the one hand, not to resist, but simply to accept without strong inclination and approval, as the child is said to believe the teacher; on the other hand, "to believe" is used to signify assenting to something with choice, and, as it were, with the sympathy that accompanies strong will, as the prodigal follows the one who chooses to live a luxurious life.

Therefore, since Carneades, Clitomachus, and their followers say that they are strongly inclined to believe that a thing is probable, and we simply allow that it may be so without assent, we differ from them, I think, in this way. We differ from the New Academy likewise in things concerning the aim; for while the men who say that they govern themselves according to that School avail themselves of the idea of the probable in life, we live according to the laws and customs, and our natural feelings, in an unprejudiced way. We could say more regarding the distinction between the two schools if we did not aim at brevity. Nevertheless, Arcesilaus, who as we said was the leader and chief of the Middle Academy, seems to me to have very much in common with the Pyrrhonean teachings, so that his school and ours are almost one. For neither does one find that he expressed an opinion about the existence or non-existence of anything, nor does he prefer one thing to another as regards trustworthiness or untrustworthiness; he suspends his judgment regarding all things. The difference is that we say these things according to what appears to us, and not affirmatively, while he says them as if speaking of realities and assent an evil. If we are to believe also the things that are said about him, he appeared at first sight to be a Pyrrhonean, but he was in truth a Dogmatic, for he used to test his companions by the method of doubt to see whether they were gifted enough to take in Plato's dogmas, so that he appeared to be a Sceptic, but at the same time he communicated the doctrines of Plato to those of his companions who were gifted. Hence Ariston also said about him—



"Plato in front, Pyrrhon behind, Diodorus in the middle,"



because he availed himself of the dialectic of Diodorus, but was wholly a Platonist. Now Philo and his followers say that as far as the Stoic criterion is concerned, they are comprehensible. Antiochus, however, transferred the Stoa to the Academy, so that it was even said of him that he taught the Stoic philosophy in the Academy, because he tried to show that the Stoic doctrines are found in Plato. The difference, therefore, between the Sceptical School and the Fourth and Fifth Academy is evident.





CHAPTER XXXIV


Is Empiricism in Medicine the same as Scepticism?





Some say that the medical sect called Empiricism is the same as Scepticism. Yet the fact must be recognized, that even if Empiricism does maintain the impossibility of knowledge, it is neither Scepticism itself, nor would it suit the Sceptic to take that sect upon himself. He could rather, it seems to me, belong to the so-called Methodic School. For this alone, of all the medical sects, does not seem to proceed rashly in regard to unknown things, and does not presume to say whether they are comprehensible or not, but is guided by phenomena, and receives from them the same help which they seem to give to the Sceptical system.

For we have said in what has gone before, that the every-day life which the Sceptic lives is of four parts, depending on the guidance of nature, on the necessity of the feelings, on the traditions of laws and customs, and on the teaching of the arts. Now as by necessity of the feelings the Sceptic is led by thirst to drink, and by hunger to food, and to supply similar needs in the same way, so also the physician of the Methodic School is led by the feelings to find suitable remedies; in constipation he produces a relaxation, as one takes refuge in the sun from the shrinking on account of intense cold; he is led by a flux to the stopping of it, as those in a hot bath who are dripping from a profuse perspiration and are relaxed, hasten to check it by going into the cold air. Moreover, it is evident that the Methodic physician forces those things which are of a foreign nature to adapt themselves to their own nature, as even the dog tries to get a sharp stick out that is thrust into him. In order, however, that I should not overstep the outline character of this work by discussing details, I think that all the things that the Methodics have thus said can be classified as referring to the necessity of the feelings that are natural or those that are unnatural.

Besides this, it is common to both schools to have no dogmas, and to use words loosely. For as the Sceptic uses the formula "I determine nothing," and "I understand nothing," as we said above, so the Methodic also uses the expressions "Community," and "To go through," and other similar ones without over much care. In a similar way he uses the word "Indication" undogmatically, meaning that the symptoms of the patient either natural or unnatural, indicate the remedies that would be suitable, as we said in speaking of thirst, hunger, and other things. It will thus be seen that the Methodic School of medicine has a certain relationship to Scepticism which is closer than that of the other medical sects, speaking comparatively if not absolutely from these and similar tokens. Having said so much in reference to the schools that seem to closely resemble Scepticism, we conclude the general consideration of Scepticism and the First Book of the Sketches.





SEXTUS EMPIRICUS AND GREEK SCEPTICISM


By Mary Mills Patrick





CHAPTER I


The Historical Relations of Sextus Empiricus





Interest has revived in the works of Sextus Empiricus in recent times. There is much in the writings of Sextus that finds a parallel in the methods of modern philosophy. A common starting-point is the study of the power and limitations of human thought. There is a common desire to investigate the phenomena of sense-perception, and the genetic relations of man to the lower animals, and a common interest in the theory of human knowledge.

While, however, some of the pages of Sextus' works would form a possible introduction to certain lines of modern philosophical thought, we cannot carry the analogy farther, for Pyrrhonism as a whole lacked the essential element of all philosophical progress, which is a belief in the possibility of finding and establishing the truth in the subjects investigated. Before beginning a critical study of the writings of Sextus Empiricus, and the light which they throw on the development of Greek Scepticism, it is necessary to make ourselves somewhat familiar with the environment in which he lived and wrote. We shall thus be able to comprehend more fully the standpoint from which he regarded philosophical questions.

Let us accordingly attempt to give some details of his life, including his profession, the time when he lived, the place of his birth, the country in which he taught, and the general aim and character of his works. Here, however, we encounter great difficulties, for although we possess most of the writings of Sextus well preserved, the evidence which they provide on the points mentioned is very slight. He does not give us biographical details in regard to himself, nor does he refer to his contemporaries in a way to afford any exact knowledge of them.

The Sceptical School was long closely connected with the Empirical School of medicine, and the later Pyrrhoneans, when they were physicians, as was often the case, belonged for the most part to this school. Menedotus of Nicomedia is the first Sceptic, however, who is formally spoken of as an Empirical physician, and his contemporary Theodas of Laodicea was also an Empirical physician. The date of Menedotus and Theodas is difficult to fix, but Brochard and Hass agree that it was about 150 A.D. After the time of these two physicians, who were also each in turn at the head of the Sceptical School, there seems to have been a definite alliance between Pyrrhonism and Empiricism in medicine, and we have every reason to believe that this alliance existed until the time of Sextus.

The difficulty in regard to the name arises from Sextus' own testimony. In the first book of the Hypotyposes he takes strong ground against the identity of Pyrrhonism and Empiricism in medicine. Although he introduces his objections with the admission that "some say that they are the same," in recognition of the close union that had existed between them, he goes on to say that "Empiricism is neither Scepticism itself, nor would it suit the Sceptic to take that sect upon himself," for the reason that Empiricism maintains dogmatically the impossibility of knowledge, but he would prefer to belong to the Methodical School, which was the only medical school worthy of the Sceptic. "For this alone of all the medical sects, does not proceed rashly it seems to me, in regard to unknown things, and does not presume to say whether they are comprehensible or not, but it is guided by phenomena. It will thus be seen that the Methodical School of medicine has a certain relationship to Scepticism which is closer than that of the other medical sects.

We know from the testimony of Sextus himself that he was a physician. In one case he uses the first person for himself as a physician, and in another he speaks of Asclepius as "the founder of our science," and all his illustrations show a breadth and variety of medical knowledge that only a physician could possess. He published a medical work which, unfortunately for the solution of the difficult question that we have in hand, is lost, and nothing is known of its contents.

Pappenheim thinks that Sextus belonged to the Methodical School, both from his strong expression in favor of that school in Hyp. I. 236, as above, and also because many of his medical opinions, as found in his works, agree with the teachings of the Methodical School, more nearly than with those of the Empiricists. Pappenheim also claims that we find no inconsistency with this view in the passage given where Sextus classes the Sceptics with the Empiricists, but considers that statement an instance of carelessness in expressing himself, on the part of Sextus.

The position of Pappenheim is assailable for the reason that in dealing with any problem regarding an author on the basis of internal evidence, we have no right to consider one of his statements worthy of weight, and another one unworthy, on the supposition that he expressed himself carelessly in the second instance. Rather must we attempt to find his true standpoint by fairly meeting all the difficulties offered in apparently conflicting passages. This has been attempted by Zeller, Brochard, Natorp and others, with the general result that all things considered they think without doubt that Sextus belonged to the Empirical School.

Natorp points out that Sextus does not speak more favourably of the medical stand of the Methodical School, but only compares the way in which both schools regarded the question of the possibility of knowledge, and thinks that Sextus could have been an Empiricist as a physician notwithstanding his condemnation of the attitude of the Empirical School in relation to the theory of knowledge. This difference between the two schools was a small one, and on a subtle and unimportant point; in fact, a difference in philosophical theory, and not in medical practice.

While we would agree with the authors above referred to, that Sextus very probably recognized the bond between the Empirical School of medicine and Pyrrhonism, yet to make his possible connection with that school the explanation of his name, gives him more prominence as a physician than is consistent with what we know of his career. The long continued union of Empiricism and Scepticism would naturally support the view that Sextus was, at least during the earlier part of his life, a physician of that school, and yet it may be that he was not named Empiricus for that reason. There is one instance in ancient writings where Empiricus is known as a simple proper name.

The chief argument for this view of the case is that there were other leaders of the Sceptical School, for whom we can claim far greater influence as Empiricists than for Sextus, and for whom the surname Empiricus would have been more appropriate, if it was given in consequence of prominence in the Empirical School. Sextus is known to the world as a Sceptic, and not as a physician. He was classed in later times with Pyrrho, and his philosophical works survived, while his medical writings did not, but are chiefly known from his own mention of them. Moreover, the passage which we have quoted from the Hypotyposes is too strong to allow us easily to believe that Sextus remained all his life a member of the Empirical School. He could hardly have said, "Nor would it suit the Sceptic to take that sect upon himself," if he at the same time belonged to it. His other references to the Empirical School, of a more favorable character, can be easily explained on the ground of the long continued connection which had existed between the two schools. It is quite possible to suppose that Sextus was an Empiricist a part of his life, and afterwards found the Methodical School more to his liking, and such a change would not in any way have affected his stand as a physician.

In regard to the exact time when Sextus Empiricus lived, we gain very little knowledge from internal evidence, and outside sources of information are equally uncertain. Diogenes Laertius must have been a generation younger than Sextus, as he mentions the disciple of Sextus, Saturninus, as an Empirical physician.

The time of Diogenes is usually estimated as the first half of the third century A.D., therefore Sextus cannot be brought forward later than the beginning of the century. Sextus, however, directs his writings entirely against the Dogmatics, by whom he distinctly states that he means the Stoics, and the influence of the Stoics began to decline in the beginning of the third century A.D. A fact often used as a help in fixing the date of Sextus is his mention of Basilides the Stoic. This Basilides was supposed to be identical with one of the teachers of Marcus Aurelius. This is accepted by Zeller in the second edition of his History of Philosophy, but not in the third for the reason that Sextus, in all the work from which this reference is taken, i.e. Math. VII.—XI., mentions no one besides Aenesidemus, who lived later than the middle of the last century B.C.

The Basilides referred to by Sextus may be one mentioned in a list of twenty Stoics, in a fragment of Diogenes Laertius. Too much importance has, however, been given to the relation of the mention of Basilides the Stoic to the question of the date of Sextus. Even if the Basilides referred to by Sextus is granted to have been the teacher of Marcus Aurelius, it only serves to show that Sextus lived either at the same time with Marcus Aurelius or after him, which is a conclusion that we must in any case reach for other reasons.

The fact that has caused the greatest uncertainty in regard to the date of Sextus is that Claudius Galen in his works mentions several Sceptics who were also physicians of the Empirical School, and often speaks of Herodotus, supposed to be identical with the teacher of Sextus given by Diogenes Laertius, but makes no reference whatever to Sextus. As Galen's time passes the limit of the second century A.D., we must either infer that Sextus was not the well-known physician that he was stated to be by Pseudo-Galen, and consequently not known to Galen, or that Galen wrote before Sextus became prominent as a Sceptic. This silence on the part of Galen in regard to Sextus increases the doubt, caused by Sextus' own criticism of the Empirical School of medicine, as to his having been an Empiricist. The question is made more complicated, as it is difficult to fix the identity of the Herodotus so often referred to by Galen. As Galen died about 200 A.D. at the age of seventy, we should fix the date of Sextus early in the third century, and that of Diogenes perhaps a little later than the middle, were it not that early in the third century the Stoics began to decline in influence, and could hardly have excited the warmth of animosity displayed by Sextus.

We must then suppose that Sextus wrote at the very latter part of the second century, and either that Galen did not know him, or that Galen's books were published before Sextus became prominent either as a physician or as a Sceptic. The fact that he may have been better known as the latter than as the former does not sufficiently account for Galen's silence, as other Sceptics are mentioned by him of less importance than Sextus, and the latter, even if not as great a physician as Pseudo-Galen asserts, was certainly both a Sceptic and a physician, and must have belonged to one of the two medical schools so thoroughly discussed by Galen—either the Empirical or the Methodical. Therefore, if Sextus were a contemporary of Galen, he was so far removed from the circle of Galen's acquaintances as to have made no impression upon him, either as a Sceptic or a physician, a supposition that is very improbable. We must then fix the date of Sextus late in the second century, and conclude that the climax of his public career was reached after Galen had finished those of his writings which are still extant.

We also know that he must have been a Greek from the beauty and facility of his style, and from his acquaintance with Greek dialects. The place of his birth can only, however, be conjectured, from arguments indirectly derived from his writings. His constant references throughout his works to the minute customs of different nations ought to give us a clue to the solution of this question, but strange to say they do not give us a decided one. Of these references a large number, however, relate to the customs of Libya, showing a minute knowledge in regard to the political and religious customs of this land that he displays in regard to no other country except Egypt. Fabricius thinks Libya was not his birth place because of a reference which he makes to it in the Hypotyposes.

This conclusion is, however, entirely unfounded, as the explanation of Sextus simply shows that the people whom he was then addressing were not familiar with the nations of Libya. Suidas speaks of two men called Sextus, one from Chaeronea and one from Libya, both of whom he calls Sceptics, and to one of whom he attributes Sextus' books. All authorities agree in asserting that great confusion exists in the works of Suidas; and Fabricius, Zeller, and Pappenheim place no weight upon this testimony of Suidas. Haas, however, contends that it is unreasonable to suppose that this confusion could go as far as to attribute the writings of Sextus Empiricus to Sextus of Chaeronea, and also make the latter a Sceptic, and he considers it far more reasonable to accept the testimony of Suidas, as it coincides so well with the internal evidence of Sextus' writings in regard to his native land. It is nevertheless evident, from his familiarity with the customs, language, and laws of Athens, Alexandria and Rome, that he must have resided at some time in each of these cities.

Of all the problems connected with the historical details of the life of Sextus, the one that is the most difficult of solution, and also the most important for our present purpose of making a critical study of his teaching, is to fix the seat of the Sceptical School during the time that he was in charge of it. The Hypotyposes are lectures delivered in public in that period of his life. Where then were they delivered? We know that the Sceptical School must have had a long continued existence as a definite philosophical movement, although some have contended otherwise. The fact of its existence as an organized direction of thought, is demonstrated by its formulated teachings, and the list given by Diogenes Laertius of its principal leaders, and by references from the writings of Sextus. In the first book of Hypotyposes he refers to Scepticism as a distinct system of philosophy.

Pyrrho, the founder of the school, taught in Elis, his native village; but even as early as the time of Timon, his immediate follower, his teachings were somewhat known in Alexandria, where Timon for a while resided. The immediate disciples of Timon, as given by Diogenes, were not men known in Greece or mentioned in Greek writings.

The Academy under Antiochus and his followers had driven Pyrrhonism from the partial union with the Academy, which it had experienced after the breaking up of the school under the immediate successors of Timon. Aenesidemus taught about the time of our era in Alexandria, and established the school there anew; and his followers are spoken of in a way that presupposes their continuing in the same place. There is every reason to think that the connection of Sextus with Alexandria was an intimate one, not only because Alexandria had been for so long a time the seat of Pyrrhonism, but also from internal evidence from his writings and their subsequent historical influence; and yet the Hypotyposes could not have been delivered in Alexandria, as he often refers to that place in comparison with the place where he was then speaking. He says, furthermore, that he teaches in the same place where his master taught.

Therefore the school must have been removed from Alexandria, in or before the time of the teacher of Sextus, to some other centre. The Hypotyposes are from beginning to end a direct attack on the Dogmatics; therefore Sextus must have taught either in some city where the dogmatic philosophy was strong, or in some rival philosophical centre. The Hypotyposes show also that the writer had access to some large library. Alexandria, Rome and Athens are the three places the most probable for selection for such a purpose. For whatever reason the seat of the school was removed from Alexandria by the master of Sextus, or by himself, from the place where it had so long been united with the Empirical School of medicine, Athens would seem the most suitable city for its recontinuance, in the land where Pyrrhonism first had its birth. Sextus, however, in one instance, in referring to things invisible because of their outward relations, says in illustration, "as the city of Athens is invisible to us at present."

In other places also he contrasts the Athenians with the people whom he is addressing, equally with the Alexandrians, thus putting Athens as well as Alexandria out of the question.

Of the different writers on Sextus Empiricus, those who have treated this part of the subject most critically are Haas and Pappenheim. We will therefore consider, somewhat at length, the results presented by these two authors. Haas thinks that the Hypotyposes were delivered in Rome for the following reasons. Sextus' lectures must have been given in some centre of philosophical schools and of learning. He never opposes Roman relations to those of the place where he is speaking, as he does in regard to Athens and Alexandria. He uses the name "Romans" only three times, once comparing them to the Rhodians, once to the Persians, and once in general to other nations. In the first two of these references, the expression "among the Romans" in the first part of the antithesis is followed by the expression, "among us," in the second part, which Haas understands to be synonymous. The third reference is in regard to a Roman law, and the use of the word 'Roman' does not at all show that Sextus was not then in Rome. The character of the laws referred to by Sextus shows that they were always Roman laws, and his definition of law is especially a definition of Roman law. This argument might, it would seem, apply to any part of the Roman Empire, but Haas claims that the whole relation of law to custom as treated of by Sextus, and all his statements of customs forbidden at that time by law, point to Rome as the place of his residence. Further, Haas considers the Herodotus mentioned by Galen as a prominent physician in Rome, to have been the predecessor and master of Sextus, in whose place Sextus says that he is teaching. Haas also thinks that Sextus' refutation of the identity of Pyrrhonism with Empiricism evidently refers to a paragraph in Galen's Subfiguratio Empirica, which would be natural if the Hypotyposes were written shortly after Galen's Sub. Em., and in the same place. Further, Hippolytus, who wrote in or near Rome very soon after the time of Sextus, apparently used the Hypotyposes, which would be more natural if he wrote in the same place. According to Haas, everything in internal evidence, and outward testimony, points to Rome as having been the city where Sextus occupied his position as the head of the Sceptical School. The Emperor Julian makes use of the works of Sextus, and he is frequently quoted by the Church Fathers of the Eastern Church.

We must accept the close connection of Pyrrhonism with Alexandria, and the subsequent influence which it exerted upon the literature of the East. All historical relations tend to fix the permanent seat of Pyrrhonism, after its separation from the Academy, in Alexandria. There is nothing to point to its removal from Alexandria before the time of Menodotus, who is the teacher of Herodotus, and for many reasons to be considered the real teacher of Sextus. It was Menodotus who perfected the Empirical doctrines, and who brought about an official union between Scepticism and Empiricism, and who gave Pyrrhonism in great measure, the éclat that it enjoyed in Alexandria, and who appears to have been the most powerful influence in the school, from the time of Aenesidemus to that of Sextus. Furthermore, Sextus' familiarity with Alexandrian customs bears the imprint of original knowledge, and he cannot, as Zeller implies, be accepted as simply quoting. One could hardly agree with Zeller, that the familiarity shown by Sextus with the customs of both Alexandria and Rome in the Hypotyposes does not necessarily show that he ever lived in either of those places, because a large part of his works are compilations from other books; but on the contrary, the careful reader of Sextus' works must find in all of them much evidence of personal knowledge of Alexandria, Athens and Rome. A part of Sextus' books also may have been written in Alexandria.

If these were also lectures, then Sextus taught in Alexandria as well as elsewhere. The history of Eastern literature for the centuries immediately following the time of Sextus, showing as it does in so many instances the influence of Pyrrhonism, and a knowledge of the Hypotyposes, furnishes us with an incontestable proof that the school could not have been for a long time removed from the East, and the absence of such knowledge in Roman literature is also a strong argument against its long continuance in that city. It would seem, however, from all the data at command, that during the years that the Sceptical School was removed from Alexandria, its headquarters were in Rome, and that the Pyrrhonean Hypotyposes were delivered in Rome. Let us briefly consider the arguments in favour of such a hypothesis. Scepticism was not unknown in Rome. Pappenheim quotes the remark of Cicero that Pyrrhonism was long since dead, and the sarcasm of Seneca, Quis est qui tradat praecepta Pyrrhonis? as an argument against the knowledge of Pyrrhonism in Rome. We must remember, however, that in Cicero's time Aenesidemus had not yet separated himself from the Academy; or if we consider the Lucius Tubero to whom Aenesidemus dedicated his works, as the same Lucius Tubero who was the friend of Cicero in his youth, and accordingly fix the date of Aenesidemus about 50 B.C., even then Aenesidemus' work in Alexandria was too late to have necessarily been known to Cicero, whose remark must have been referred to the old school of Scepticism. Should we grant, however, that the statements of Cicero and Seneca prove that in their time Pyrrhonism was extinct in Rome, they certainly do not show that after their death it could not have again revived, for the Hypotyposes were delivered more than a century after the death of Seneca. There are very few writers in Aenesidemus' own time who showed any influence of his teachings.

This influence was felt later, as Pyrrhonism became better known. That Pyrrhonism received some attention in Rome before the time of Sextus is nevertheless demonstrated by the teachings of Favorinus there. Suidas calls Favorinus a great author and learned in all science and philosophy, and Favorinus made Rome the centre of his teaching and writing. His date is fixed by Zeller at 80-150 A.D., therefore Pyrrhonism was known in Rome shortly before the time of Sextus.

The whole tone of the Hypotyposes, with the constant references to the Stoics as living present opponents, shows that these lectures must have been delivered in one of the centres of Stoicism. As Alexandria and Athens are out of the question, all testimony points to Rome as having been the seat of the Pyrrhonean School, for at least a part of the time that Sextus was at its head. We would then accept the teacher of Sextus, in whose place he says he taught, as the Herodotus so often referred to by Galen who lived in Rome. Sextus' frequent references to Asclepiades, whom he mentions ten different times by name in his works, speak in favour of Rome in the matter under discussion, as Asclepiades made that city one of the centres of medical culture. On the other hand, the fact that there is no trace of the Hypotyposes in later Roman literature, with the one exception of the works of Hippolytus, as opposed to the wide-spread knowledge of them shown in the East for centuries, is incontestable historical proof that the Sceptical School could not long have had its seat at Rome.

From the two passages given above from Sextus' work against physics, he must either have written that book in Alexandria, it would seem, or have quoted those passages from some other work. May we not then conclude, that Sextus was at the head of the school in Rome for a short time, where it may have been removed temporarily, on account of the difficulty with the Empiricists, implied in Hyp. I. 236-241, or in order to be better able to attack the Stoics, but that he also taught in Alexandria, where the real home of the school was certainly found? There it probably came to an end about fifty years after the time of Sextus, and from that centre the Sceptical works of Sextus had their wide-spread influence in the East.

The books of Sextus Empiricus furnish us with the best and fullest presentation of ancient Scepticism which has been preserved to modern times, and give Sextus the position of one of the greatest men of the Sceptical School. His works which are still extant are the Pyrrhonean Hypotyposes in three volumes, and the two works comprising eleven books which have been united in later times, one of which is directed against the sciences in general, and the other against the dogmatic philosophers. The six books composing the first of these are written respectively against grammarians, rhetoricians, geometricians, arithmeticians, astronomers and musicians. The five books of the latter consist of two against the logicians, two against physics, and one against systems of morals. If the last short work of the first book directed against the arithmeticians is combined with the one preceding against the geometricians, as it well could be, the two works together would be divided into ten different parts; there is evidence to show that in ancient times such a division was made.

There were two other works of Sextus. The character of the extant works of Sextus is similar, as they are all directed either against science or against the dogmatics, and they all present the negative side of Pyrrhonism. The vast array of arguments comprising the subject-matter, often repeated in the same and different forms, are evidently taken largely from the Sceptical works which Sextus had resource to, and are, in fact, a summing up of all the wisdom of the Sceptical School. The style of these books is fluent, and the Greek reminds one of Plutarch and Thucydides, and although Sextus does not claim originality, but presents in all cases the arguments of the Sceptic, yet the illustrations and the form in which the arguments are presented, often bear the marks of his own thought, and are characterized here and there by a wealth of humor that has not been sufficiently noticed in the critical works on Sextus. Of all the authors who have reviewed Sextus, Brochard is the only one who seems to have understood and appreciated his humorous side.

We shall now proceed to the consideration of the general position and aim of Pyrrhonism.





CHAPTER II


The Position and Aim of Pyrrhonism





The first volume of the Pyrrhonean Hypotyposes gives the most complete statement found in any of the works of Sextus Empiricus of the teachings of Pyrrhonism and its relation to other schools of philosophy. The chief source of the subject-matter presented is a work of the same name by Aenesidemus, either directly used by Sextus, or through the writings of those who followed Aenesidemus. The comprehensive title was very probably used in general to designate courses of lectures given by the leaders of the Sceptical School.

In the opening chapters of the Hypotyposes Sextus undertakes to define the position and aim of Pyrrhonism.

In introducing his subject he treats briefly of the differences between philosophical schools, dividing them into three classes; those which claim that they have found the truth, like the schools of Aristotle and Epicurus and the Stoics; those which deny the possibility of finding it, like that of the Academicians; and those that still seek it, like the Sceptical School. The accusation against the Academicians, that they denied the possibility of finding the truth, was one that the Sceptics were very fond of making. We shall discuss the justice of it later, simply remarking here, that to affirm the "incomprehensibility of the unknown," was a form of expression that the Pyrrhonists themselves were sometimes betrayed into, notwithstanding their careful avoidance of dogmatic statements.

After defining the three kinds of philosophy as the Dogmatic, the Academic and the Sceptic, Sextus reminds his hearers that he does not speak dogmatically in anything that he says, but that he intends simply to present the Sceptical arguments historically, and as they appear to him. He characterizes his treatment of the subject as general rather than critical, including a statement of the character of Scepticism, its idea, its principles, its manner of reasoning, its criterion and aim, and a presentation of the Tropes, or aspects of doubt, and the Sceptical formulae and the distinction between Scepticism and the related schools of philosophy.

The result of all the gradual changes which the development of thought had brought about in the outward relations of the Sceptical School, was to increase the earnestness of the claim of the Sceptics to be simply followers of Pyrrho, the great founder of the movement. In discussing the names given to the Sceptics, Sextus gives precedence very decidedly to the title "Pyrrhonean," because Pyrrho appears the best representative of Scepticism, and more prominent than all who before him occupied themselves with it.

It was a question much discussed among philosophers in ancient times, whether Pyrrhonism should be considered a philosophical sect or not. Hippobotus does not include Pyrrhonism among the other sects.

Diogenes himself, after some hesitation remarking that many do not consider it a sect, finally decides to call it so.

Sextus in discussing this subject calls Scepticism a movement, saying that Scepticism is not a sect, if that word implies a systematic arrangement of dogmas, for the Sceptic has no dogmas. If, however, a sect may mean simply the following of a certain system of reasoning according to what appears to be true, then Scepticism is a sect.

The purpose of Scepticism is then the hope of ataraxia, and its origin was in the troubled state of mind induced by the inequality of things, and uncertainty in regard to the truth. Therefore, says Sextus, men of the greatest talent began the Sceptical system by placing in opposition to every argument an equal one, thus leading to a philosophical system without a dogma, for the Sceptic claims that he has no dogma. The Sceptic is never supposed to state a decided opinion, but only to say what appears to him. Even the Sceptical formulae, such as "Nothing more," or "I decide nothing," or "All is false," include themselves with other things. The only statements that the Sceptic can make, are in regard to his own sensations. He cannot deny that he is warm or cold or hungry.



Sextus replies to the charge that the Sceptics deny phenomena by refuting it.



The Sceptic does not deny phenomena, because they are the only criteria by which he can regulate his actions. "We call the criterion of the Sceptical School the phenomenon, meaning by this name the idea of it." Phenomena are the only things which the Sceptic does not deny, and he guides his life by them. They are, however, subjective. Sextus distinctly affirms that sensations are the phenomena, and that they lie in susceptibility and voluntary feeling, and that they constitute the appearances of objects. We see from this that Sextus makes the only reality to consist in subjective experience, but he does not follow this to its logical conclusion, and doubt the existence of anything outside of mind. He rather takes for granted that there is a something unknown outside, about which the Sceptic can make no assertions. Phenomena are the criteria according to which the Sceptic orders his daily life, as he cannot be entirely inactive, and they affect life in four different ways. They constitute the guidance of nature, the impulse of feeling; they give rise to the traditions of customs and laws, and make the teaching of the arts important. According to the tradition of laws and customs, piety is a good in daily life, but it is not in itself an abstract good. The Sceptic of Sextus' time also inculcated the teaching of the arts, as indeed must be the case with professing physicians, as most of the leading Sceptics were. Sextus says, "We are not without energy in the arts which we undertake." This was a positive tendency which no philosophy, however negative, could escape, and the Sceptic tried to avoid inconsistency in this respect, by separating his philosophy from his theory of life. His philosophy controlled his opinions, and his life was governed by phenomena.

The aim of Pyrrhonism was ataraxia in those things which pertain to opinion, and moderation in the things which life imposes.

In other words, we find here the same natural desire of the human being to rise above and beyond the limitations which pain and passion impose, which is expressed in other forms, and under other names, in other schools of philosophy. The method, however, by which ataraxia or peace of mind could be reached, was peculiar to the Sceptic. It is a state of psychological equilibrium, which results from the equality of the weight of different arguments that are opposed to each other, and the consequent impossibility of affirming in regard to either one, that it is correct. The discovery of ataraxia was, in the first instance, apparently accidental, for while the Sceptic withheld his opinion, unable to decide what things were true, and what things were false, ataraxia fortunately followed. After he had begun to philosophize, with a desire to discriminate in regard to ideas, and to separate the true from the false, or suspension of judgement, ataraxia followed as if by chance, as the shadow follows the body.

The Sceptic in seeking ataraxia in the things of opinion, does not entirely escape from suffering from his sensations. He is not wholly undisturbed, for he is sometimes cold and hungry, and so on.

He claims, nevertheless, that he suffers less than the dogmatist, who is beset with two kinds of suffering, one from the feelings themselves, and also from the conviction that they are by nature an evil. To the Sceptic nothing is in itself either an evil or a good, and so he thinks that "he escapes from difficulties easier." For instance, he who considers riches a good in themselves, is unhappy in the loss of them, and in possession of them is in fear of losing them, while the Sceptic, remembering the Sceptical saying "No more," is untroubled in whatever condition he may be found, as the loss of riches is no more an evil than the possession of them is a good. For he who considers anything good or bad by nature is always troubled, and when that which seemed good is not present with him, he thinks that he is tortured by that which is by nature bad, and follows after what he thinks to be good. Having acquired it, however, he is not at rest, for his reason tells him that a sudden change may deprive him of this thing that he considers a good. The Sceptic, however, endeavours neither to avoid nor seek anything eagerly.

Ataraxia came to the Sceptic as success in painting the foam on a horse's mouth came to Apelles the painter. After many attempts to do this, and many failures, he gave up in despair, and threw the sponge at the picture that he had used to wipe the colors from the painting with. As soon as it touched the picture it produced a representation of the foam.

Thus the Sceptics were never able to attain to ataraxia by examining the anomaly between the phenomena and the things of thought, but it came to them of its own accord just when they despaired of finding it.

The intellectual preparation for producing ataraxia, consists in placing arguments in opposition to each other, both in regard to phenomena, and to things of the intellect. By placing the phenomenal in opposition to the phenomenal, the intellectual to the intellectual, and the phenomenal to the intellectual, and vice versa, the present to the present, past, and future, one will find that no argument exists that is incontrovertible. It is not necessary to accept any statement whatever as true.

Although ataraxia concerns things of the opinion, and must be preceded by the intellectual process described above, it is not itself a function of the intellect, or any subtle kind of reasoning, but seems to be rather a unique form of moral perfection, leading to happiness, or is itself happiness.

It was the aim of Scepticism to know nothing, and to assert nothing in regard to any subject, but at the same time not to affirm that knowledge on all subjects is impossible, and consequently to have the attitude of still seeking. The standpoint of Pyrrhonism was materialistic. We find from the teachings of Sextus that he affirmed the non-existence of the soul, or the ego, and denied absolute existence altogether. The introductory statements of Diogenes regarding Pyrrhonism would agree with this standpoint.

There is no criterion of truth in Scepticism. We cannot prove that the phenomena represent objects, or find out what the relation of phenomena to objects is. There is no criterion to tell us which one is true of all the different representations of the same object, and of all the varieties of sensation that arise through the many phases of relativity of the conditions which control the character of the phenomena.

Every effort to find the truth can deal only with phenomena, and absolute reality can never be known.





CHAPTER III


The Sceptical Tropes





The exposition of the Tropes of Pyrrhonism constitutes historically and philosophically the most important part of the writings of Sextus Empiricus. These Tropes represent the sum total of the wisdom of the older Sceptical School, and were held in high respect for centuries, not only by the Pyrrhoneans, but also by many outside the narrow limits of that School. In the first book of the Hypotyposes Sextus gives two classes of Tropes and the eight Tropes of Aenesidemus against Aetiology.

The Tropes are arranged in groups of ten, five and two, according to the period of the Sceptical School to which they belong; the first of these groups is historically the most important, as these are far more closely connected with the general development of Scepticism, than the later ones. By the name of Trope, the Sceptic understood a manner of thought, or form of argument, or standpoint of judgement. It was a term common in Greek philosophy, used in this sense, from the time of Aristotle.

The Stoics, however, used the word with a different meaning from that attributed to it by the Sceptics. Favorinus wrote a book entitled Pyrrhonean Tropes, and Plutarch one called The Ten Tropes of Pyrrho. All authorities unite in attributing to Aenesidemus the work of systematizing and presenting to the world the ten Tropes. He was the first to conceive the project of opposing an organized philosophical system of Pyrrhonism to the dogmatism of his contemporaries.

Moreover, the fact that Diogenes introduces the Tropes into his life of Pyrrho, does not necessarily imply that he considered Pyrrho their author, for Diogenes invariably combines the teachings of the followers of a movement with those of the founders themselves; he gives these Tropes after speaking of Aenesidemus' work entitled Pyrrhonean Hypotyposes, and apparently quotes from this book, in giving at least a part of his presentation of Pyrrhonism, either directly or through, the works of others. Nietzsche proposes a correction of the text of Diogenes IX. 11, 79, which would make him quote the Tropes from a book by Theodosius, author of a commentary on the works of Theodas. No writer of antiquity claims for the Tropes an older source than the books of Aenesidemus, to whom Aristocles also attributes them. They are not mentioned in Diogenes' life of Timon, the immediate disciple of Pyrrho. Cicero has no knowledge of them, and does not refer to them in his discussion of Scepticism.

Aenesidemus was undoubtedly the first to formulate these Tropes, but many things tend to show that they resulted, in reality, from the gradual classification of the results of the teachings of Pyrrho, in the subsequent development of thought from his own time to that of Aenesidemus. The ideas contained in the Tropes were not original with Aenesidemus, but are more closely connected with the thought of earlier times. The decidedly empirical character of the Tropes proves this connection, for the eight Tropes of Aetiology, which were original with Aenesidemus, bear a far stronger dialectic stamp, thus showing a more decided dialectic influence of the Academy than is found in the Tropes. Many of the illustrations given of the Tropes also, testify to a time of greater antiquity than that of Aenesidemus. The name Trope was well known in ancient times, and the number ten reminds us of the ten opposing principles of Pythagoras, and the ten categories of Aristotle, the fourth of which was the same as the eighth Trope. The terminology, however, with very few exceptions, points to a later period than that of Pyrrho. Zeller points out a number of expressions in both Diogenes' and Sextus' exposition of the Tropes, which could not date back farther than the time of Aenesidemus.

One of the most striking features of the whole presentation of the Tropes, especially as given by Sextus, is their mosaic character, stamping them not as the work of one person, but as a growth, and also an agglutinous growth, lacking very decidedly the symmetry of thought that the work of one mind would have shown.

At the time of the separation of Pyrrhonism from the Academy, no other force was as strong in giving life to the school as the systematic treatment by Aenesidemus of the Ten Tropes. The reason of this is evident. It was not that the ideas of the Sceptical Tropes were original with Aenesidemus, but because a definite statement of belief is always a far more powerful influence than principles which are vaguely understood and accepted. There is always, however, the danger to the Sceptic, in making a statement even of the principles of Scepticism, that the psychological result would be a dogmatic tendency of mind, as we shall see later was the case, even with Aenesidemus himself. That the Sceptical School could not escape the accusation of dogmatizing, from the Dogmatics, even in stating the grounds of their Scepticism, we know from Diogenes.

To avoid this dogmatic tendency of the ten Tropes, Sextus makes the frequent assertion that he does not affirm things to be absolutely true, but states them as they appear to him, and that they may be otherwise from what he has said.

Sextus tells us that "Certain Tropes, ten in number, for producing the state of ataraxia have been handed down from the older Sceptics."

He refers to them in another work as the "Tropes of Aenesidemus."There is no evidence that the substance of these Tropes was changed after the time of Aenesidemus, although many of the illustrations given by Sextus must have been of a later date, added during the two centuries that elapsed between the time of Aenesidemus and Sextus. In giving these Tropes Sextus does not claim to offer a systematic methodical classification, and closes his list of them, in their original concise form, with the remark, "We make this order ourselves." The order is given differently by Diogenes, and also by Favorinus. The Trope which Sextus gives as the tenth is the fifth given by Diogenes, the seventh by Sextus is the eighth given by Diogenes, the fifth by Sextus, the seventh by Diogenes, the tenth by Diogenes, the eighth by Sextus. Diogenes says that the one he gives as the ninth Favorinus calls the eighth, and Sextus and Aenesidemus the tenth. This statement does not correspond with the list of the Tropes which Sextus gives, proving that Diogenes took some other text than that of Sextus as his authority. The difference in the order of the Tropes shows, also, that the order was not considered a matter of great importance. There is a marked contrast in the spirit of the two presentations of the Tropes given by Sextus and Diogenes. The former gives them not only as an orator, but as one who feels that he is defending his own cause, and the school of which he is the leader, against mortal enemies, while Diogenes relates them as an historian.

Pappenheim tries to prove that Aenesidemus originally gave only nine Tropes in his Pyrrhonean Hypotyposes, as Aristocles mentions only nine in referring to the Tropes of Aenesidemus, and that the tenth was added later. Had this been the case, however, the fact would surely have been mentioned either by Diogenes or Sextus, who both refer to the ten Tropes of Aenesidemus.

The Tropes claim to prove that the character of phenomena is so relative and changeable, that certain knowledge cannot be based upon them, and as we have shown, there is no other criterion of knowledge for the Sceptic than phenomena.

All of the Tropes, except the tenth, are connected with sense-perception, and relate to the difference of the results obtained through the senses under different circumstances. They may be divided into two classes, i.e., those based upon differences of our physical organism, and those based upon external differences. To the first class belong the first, second, third and fourth; to the second class, the fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth, and also the ninth. The eighth, or that of relation, is applied objectively both by Sextus and Diogenes in their treatment of the Tropes, and is not used for objects of thought alone, but principally to show the relation of outward objects to each other. The tenth is the only one which has a moral significance, and it has also a higher subjective value than the others; it takes its arguments from an entirely different sphere of thought, and deals with metaphysical and religious contradictions in opinion, and with the question of good and evil. That this Trope is one of the oldest, we know from its distinct mention in connection with the foundation theories of Pyrrho, by Diogenes.

In treating of the subjective reasons for doubt as to the character of external reality, the Sceptics were very near the denial of all outward reality, a point, however, which they never quite reached.

There is evidently much of Sextus' own thought mixed with the illustrations of the Tropes, but it is impossible to separate the original parts from the material that was the common property of the Sceptical School. Many of these illustrations show, however, perfect familiarity with the scientific and medical teachings of the time. Before entering upon his exposition of the Tropes, Sextus gives them in the short concise form in which they must first have existed:



(i) Based upon the variety of animals.

(ii) Based upon the differences between men.

(iii) Based upon differences in the constitution of the sense organs.

(iv) Based upon circumstances.

(v) Based upon position, distance and place.

(vi) Based upon mixtures.

(vii) Based upon the quantities and constitutions of objects.

(viii) Relation.

(ix) Based upon frequency or rarity of occurrences.

(x) Based upon systems, customs and laws, mythical beliefs, and dogmatic opinions.



Although Sextus is careful not to dogmatize regarding the arrangement of the Tropes, yet there is in his classification of them a regular gradation, from the arguments based upon differences in animals to those in man, first considering the latter in relation to the physical constitution, and then to circumstances outside of us, and finally the treatment of metaphysical and moral differences.



THE FIRST TROPE



That the same mental representations are not found in different animals, may be inferred from their differences in constitution resulting from their different origins, and from the variety in their organs of sense. Sextus takes up the five senses in order, giving illustrations to prove the relative results of the mental representations in all of them, as for example the subjectivity of color and sound. All knowledge of objects through the senses is relative and not absolute. Sextus does not, accordingly, confine the impossibility of certain knowledge to the qualities that Locke regards as secondary, but includes also the primary ones in this statement. The form and shape of objects as they appear to us may be changed by pressure on the eyeball. Furthermore, the character of reflections in mirrors depend entirely on their shape, as the images in concave mirrors are very different from those in convex ones; and so in the same way as the eyes of animals are of different shapes, and supplied with different fluids, the ideas of dogs, fishes, men and grasshoppers must be very different.

In discussing the mental representations of animals of different grades of intelligence, Sextus shows a very good comprehension of the philogenetic development of the organs of sense, and draws the final conclusion that external objects are regarded differently by animals, according to their difference in constitution.

These differences in the ideas which different animals have of the same objects are demonstrated by their different tastes, as the things desired by some are fatal to others. The practical illustrations given of this result show a familiarity with natural history, and cognizance of the tastes and habits of many animals, but were probably few of them original with Sextus, unless perhaps in their application; that this train of reasoning was the common property of the Sceptic School, we know from the fact that Diogenes begins his exposition of the first Trope in a way similar to that of Sextus. His illustrations are, however, few and meagre compared with those of Sextus, and the scientific facts used by both of them may mostly be found in other authors of antiquity given in a similar way. The logical result of the reasoning used to explain the first Trope, is that we cannot compare the ideas of the animals with each other, nor with our own; nor can we prove that our ideas are more trustworthy than those of the animals. As therefore an examination of ideas is impossible, any decided opinion about their trustworthiness is also impossible, and this Trope leads to the suspension of judgment regarding external objects.

After reaching this conclusion, Sextus introduces a long chapter to prove that animals can reason. There is no reference to this in Diogenes, but there is other testimony to show that it was a favourite line of argument with the Sceptics.

Sextus, however, says that his course of reasoning is different from that of most of the Sceptics on the subject, as they usually applied their arguments to all animals, while he selected only one, namely the dog. This chapter is full of sarcastic attacks on the Dogmatics, and contains the special allusion to the Stoics as the greatest opponents of the Sceptics, which has been before referred to.

Sextus claims with a greater freedom of diction than in some apparently less original chapters, and with a wealth of special illustrations, that the dog is superior to man in acuteness of perception, that he has the power of choice, and possesses an art, that of hunting, and, also, is not deprived of virtue, as the true nature of virtue is to show justice to all, which the dog does by guarding loyally those who are kind to him, and keeping off those who do evil. The reasoning power of this animal is proved by the story taken from Chrysippus, of the dog that came to a meeting of three roads in following a scent. After seeking the scent in vain in two of the roads, he takes the third road without scenting it as a result of a quick process of thought, which proves that he shares in the famous dialectic of Chrysippus, of which the dog chooses the fifth. Either A or B or C, not A or B, therefore C.

The dog and other irrational animals may also possess spoken language, as the only proof that we have to the contrary, is the fact that we cannot understand the sounds that they make.

We have an example in this chapter of the humor of Sextus, who after enlarging on the perfect character of the dog, remarks, "For which reason it seems to me some philosophers have honoured themselves with the name of this animal," thus making a sarcastic allusion to the Cynics, especially Antisthenes.



THE SECOND TROPE



Passing on to the second Trope, Sextus aims to prove that even if we leave the differences of the mental images of animals out of the discussion, there is not a sufficient unanimity in the mental images of human beings to allow us to base any assertions upon them in regard to the character of external objects.

He had previously announced that he intended to oppose the phenomenal to the intellectual "in any way whatever," so he begins here by referring to the two parts of which man is said to be composed, the soul and the body, and proceeds to discuss the differences among men in sense-perception and in opinion. Most of the illustrations given of differences in sense-perception are medical ones; of the more general of these I will note the only two which are also given by Diogenes in his exposition of this Trope, viz., Demophon, Alexander's table waiter, who shivered in the sun, and Andron the Argive, who was so free from thirst that he travelled through the desert of Libya without seeking a drink. Some have reasoned from the presence of the first of these illustrations in the exposition of the Tropes, that a part of this material at least goes back to the time of Pyrrho, as Pyrrho from his intimacy with Alexander, when he accompanied him to India, had abundant opportunities to observe the peculiarities of his servant Demophon. The illustration of Andron the Argive is taken from Aristotle, according to Diogenes.

As the bodies of men differ, so the souls also probably differ. The differences of mind among men is not referred to by Diogenes, except in the general statement that they choose different professions; while Sextus elaborates this point, speaking of the great differences in opposing schools of philosophy, and in the objects of choice and avoidance, and sources of pleasure for different men. The poets well understand this marked difference in human desires, as Homer says,



"One man enjoys this, another enjoys that."



Sextus also quotes the beautiful lines of Pindar:



"One delights in getting honours and crowns through storm-footed horses,

Others in passing life in rooms rich in gold,

Another safe travelling enjoys, in a swift ship, on a wave of the sea.



THE THIRD TROPE



The third Trope limits the argument to the sense-perceptions of one man, a Dogmatic, if preferred, or to one whom the Dogmatics consider wise, and states that as the ideas given by the different sense organs differ radically in a way that does not admit of their being compared with each other, they furnish no reliable testimony regarding the nature of objects. "Each of the phenomena perceived by us seems to present itself in many forms, as the apple, smooth, fragrant brown and sweet." The apple was evidently the ordinary example given for this Trope, for Diogenes uses the same, but in a much more condensed form, and not with equal understanding of the results to be deduced from it. The consequence of the incompatibility of the mental representations produced through the several sense organs by the apple, may be the acceptance of either of the three following propositions: That only those qualities exist in the apple which we perceive. That more than these exist. That even those perceived do not exist. Accordingly, any experience which can give rise to such different views regarding outward objects, cannot be relied upon as a testimony concerning them.

The non-homogeneous nature of the mental images connected with the different sense organs, as presented by Sextus, reminds us of the discussion of the same subject by Berkeley in his Theory of Vision.



Sextus says that a man born with less than the usual number of senses, would form altogether different ideas of the external world than those who have the usual number, and as our ideas of objects depend on our mental images, a greater number of sense organs would give us still different ideas of outward reality.

The strong argument of the Stoics against such reasoning as this, was their doctrine of pre-established harmony between nature and the soul, so that when a representation is produced in us of a real object, by this representation the soul grasps a real existence. This argument of pre-established harmony between the faculties of the soul and the objects of nature, is the one that has been used in all ages to combat philosophical teaching that denies that we apprehend the external world as it is. It was used against Kant by his opponents, who thought in this way to refute his teachings. The Sceptics could not, of course, accept a theory of nature that included the soul and the external world in one harmonious whole, but Sextus in his discussion of the third Trope does not refute this argument as fully as he does later in his work against logic. He simply states here that philosophers themselves cannot agree as to what nature is, and furthermore, that a philosopher himself is a part of the discord, and to be judged, rather than being capable of judging, and that no conclusion can be reached by those who are themselves an element of the uncertainty.



THE FOURTH TROPE



This Trope limits the argument to each separate sense, and the effect is considered of the condition of body and mind upon sense-perception in relation to the several sense-organs.

The physical states which modify sense-perception are health and illness, sleeping and waking, youth and age, hunger and satiety, drunkenness and sobriety. All of these conditions of the body entirely change the character of the mental images, producing different judgments of the color, taste, and temperature of objects, and of the character of sounds. A man who is asleep is in a different world from one awake, the existence of both worlds being relative to the condition of waking and sleeping.

The subjective states which Sextus mentions here as modifying the character of the mental representations are hating or loving, courage or fear, sorrow or joy, and sanity or insanity. No man is ever twice in exactly the same condition of body or mind, and never able to review the differences of his ideas as a sum total, for those of the present moment only are subject to careful inspection. Furthermore, no one is free from the influence of all conditions of body or mind, so that he can be unbiased to judge his ideas, and no criterion can be established that can be shown to be true, but on the contrary, whatever course is pursued on the subject, both the criterion and the proof will be thrown into the circulus in probando, for the truth of each rests on the other.

Diogenes gives in part the same illustrations of this Trope, but in a much more condensed form. The marked characteristic of this train of reasoning is the attempt to prove that abnormal conditions are also natural. In referring at first to the opposing states of body and mind, which so change the character of sense-perception, Sextus classifies them according to the popular usage as κατὰ φύσιν and παρὰ φύσιν. This distinction was an important one, even with Aristotle, and was especially developed by the Stoics in a broader sense than referring merely to health and sickness. The Stoics, however, considered only normal conditions as being according to nature.

Sextus, on the contrary, declares that abnormal states are also conditions according to nature, and just as those who are in health are in a state that is natural to those who are in health, so also those not in health are in a state that is natural to those not in health, and in some respects according to nature. Existence, then, and non-existence are not absolute, but relative, and the world of sleep as really exists for those who are asleep as the things that exist in waking exist, although they do not exist in sleep. One mental representation, therefore, cannot be judged by another, which is also in a state of relation to existing physical and mental conditions.

Diogenes states this principle even more decidedly in his exposition of this Trope. "The insane are not in a condition opposed to nature; why they more than we? For we also see the sun as if it were stationary." Furthermore, in different periods of life ideas differ. Children are fond of balls and hoops, while those in their prime prefer other things, and the aged still others. The wisdom contained in this Trope in reference to the relative value of the things most sought after is not original with Sextus, but is found in the more earnest ethical teachings of older writers. Sextus does not, however, draw any moral conclusions from this reasoning.



THE FIFTH TROPE



This Trope leaves the discussion of the dependence of the ideas upon the physical nature, and takes up the influence of the environment upon them. It makes the difference in ideas depend upon the position, distance, and place of objects, thus taking apparently their real existence for granted. Things change their form and shape according to the distance from which they are observed, and the position in which they stand.

The same light or tone alters decidedly in different surroundings. Perspective in paintings depends on the angle at which the picture is suspended. With Diogenes this Trope is the seventh, and his exposition of it is similar, but as usual, shorter. Both Sextus and Diogenes give the illustration of the neck of the dove differing in color in different degrees of inclination, an illustration used by Protagoras also to prove the relativity of perception by the senses. "The black neck of the dove in the shade appears black, but in the light sunny and purple." Since, then, all phenomena are regarded in a certain place, and from a certain distance, and according to a certain position, each of which relations makes a great difference with the mental images, we shall be obliged also by this Trope to come to the reserving of the opinion.



THE SIXTH TROPE



This Trope leads to regarding the nature of objects, because no object can ever be presented to the organs of sense directly, but must always be perceived through some medium, or in some mixture. This mixture may be an outward one, connected with the temperature, or the rarity of the air, or the water surrounding an object, or it may be a mixture resulting from the different humors of the sense-organs. A man with the jaundice, for example, sees colors differently from one who is in health. The illustration of the jaundice is a favorite one with the Sceptics. Diogenes uses it several times in his presentation of Scepticism, and it occurs in Sextus' writings in all, as an illustration, in eight different places. The condition of the ruling faculty may also cause mixtures. Pappenheim thinks that we have here Kant's idea of a priori, only on a materialistic foundation. A careful consideration of the passage, however, shows us that Sextus' thought is more in harmony with the discoveries of modern psychiatry than with the philosophy of Kant.

Sextus does not advance any opinion as to the place of the ruling faculty in the body, which is, according to the Stoics, the principal part of the soul, where ideas, desires, and reasoning originate, but simply refers to the two theories of the Dogmatics, which claim on the one hand that it is in the brain, and on the other that it is in the heart. This subject he deals with more fully in his work against logic. As, however, he bases his argument, in discussing possible intellectual mixtures in illustration of the sixth Trope, entirely on the condition of the organ of the intellect, it is evident that his theory of the soul was a materialistic one.



THE SEVENTH TROPE



This Trope, based upon the quantities and compositions of objects, is illustrated by examples of different kinds of food, drink, and medicine, showing the different effects according to the quantity taken, as the harmfulness and the usefulness of most things depend on their quantity. Things act differently upon the senses if applied in small or large quantities, as filings of metal or horn, and separate grains of sand have a different color and touch from the same taken in the form of a solid. The result is that ideas vary according to the composition of the object, and this Trope also brings to confusion the existence of outward objects, and leads us to reserve our opinion in regard to them. This Trope is illustrated by Diogenes with exceeding brevity.



THE EIGHTH TROPE



The Trope based upon relation contains, as Sextus rightly remarks, the substance of the other nine, for the general statement of the relativity of knowledge includes the other statements made. The prominence which Sextus gave this Trope in his introduction to the ten Tropes leads one to expect here new illustrations and added arguments. We find, however, neither of these, but simply a statement that all things are in relation in one of two ways, either directly, or as being a part of a difference. These two kinds of relation are given by Protagoras, and might have been used to good purpose in the introduction to the Tropes, or at the end, to prove that all the others were really subordinate to the eighth. The reasoning is, however simply applied to the relation of objects to each other, and nothing is added that is not found elsewhere. This Trope is the tenth by Diogenes, and he strengthens his reasoning in regard to it, by a statement that Sextus does not directly make, i.e., that everything is in relation to the understanding.



THE NINTH TROPE



This is based upon the frequency and rarity of events, and refers to some of the phenomena of nature, such as the rising of the sun, and the sea, as no longer a source of astonishment, while a comet or an earthquake are wonders to those not accustomed to them. The value of objects also depends on their rarity, as for example the value of gold. Furthermore, things may be valuable at one time, and at another not so, according to the frequency and rarity of the occurrence. Diogenes gives only two illustrations to this Trope, that of the sun and the earthquake.



THE TENTH TROPE



We have already remarked on the difference in the character of the tenth Trope, dealing as it does, not with the ideas of objects, like the other nine Tropes, but with philosophical and religious opinions, and questions of right and wrong. It was the well-known aim of the Sceptics to submit to the laws and customs of the land where they were found, and to conform to certain moral teachings and religious ceremonies; this they did without either affirming or denying the truth of the principles upon which these teachings were based, and also without any passion or strong feeling in regard to them, as nothing in itself can be proved to be good or evil. The tenth Trope accordingly, brings forward contradictions in customs, laws, and the beliefs of different lands, to show that they are also changeable and relative, and not of absolute worth. The foundation-thought of this Trope is given twice by Diogenes, once as we have before stated in his introduction to the life of Pyrrho, and also as one of the Tropes. As it is apparently one of the oldest of the Tropes, it would naturally be much used in discussing with the Stoics, whose philosophy had such a wide ethical significance, and must also have held an important place in the Sceptical School in all metaphysical and philosophical discussions. The definition in the beginning of Sextus' exposition of this Trope Fabricius thinks was taken from Aristotle, of schools, laws, customs, mythical beliefs and dogmatic opinions, and the definition which Diogenes gives of law in his life of Plato is similar. Pappenheim, however, thinks they were taken from the Stoics, perhaps from Chrysippus. The argument is based upon the differences in development of thought, as affecting the standpoint of judgment in philosophy, in morals, and religion, the results of which we find in the widely opposing schools of philosophy, in the variety in religious belief, and in the laws and customs of different countries. Therefore the decisions reached in the world of thought leave us equally in doubt regarding the absolute value of any standards, with those obtained through sense-perception, and the universal conflict of opinion regarding all questions of philosophy and ethics leads us also according to this Trope to the reserving of the opinion. This Trope is the fifth as given by Diogenes, who placed it directly after the first four which relate more especially to human development, while Sextus uses it as the final one, perhaps thinking that an argument based upon the higher powers of man deserves the last place, or is the summation of the other arguments.

Following the exposition of the ten Tropes of the older Sceptics, Sextus gives the five Tropes which he attributes to the "later Sceptics." Sextus nowhere mentions the author of these Tropes. Diogenes, however, attributes them to Agrippa, a man of whom we know nothing except his mention of him. He was evidently one of the followers of Aenesidemus, and a scholar of influence in the Sceptical School, who must have himself had disciples, as Diogenes says - add to these tropes other five tropes, using the plural verb. Another Sceptic, also mentioned by Diogenes, and a man unknown from other sources, named some of his books after Agrippa. Agrippa is not given by Diogenes in the list of the leaders of the Sceptical School, but his influence in the development of the thought of the School must have been great, as the transition from the ten Tropes of the "older Sceptics" to the five attributed to Agrippa is a marked one, and shows the entrance into the school of a logical power before unknown in it. The latter are not a reduction of the Tropes of Aenesidemus, but are written from an entirely different standpoint. The ten Tropes are empirical, and aim to furnish objective proofs of the foundation theories of Pyrrhonism, while the five are rather rules of thought leading to logical proof, and are dialectic in their character. We find this distinction illustrated by the different way in which the Trope of relativity is treated in the two groups. In the first it points to an objective relativity, but with Agrippa to a general subjective logical principle. The originality of the Tropes of Agrippa does not lie in their substance matter, but in their formulation and use in the Sceptical School. These methods of proof were, of course, not new, but were well known to Aristotle, and were used by the Sceptical Academy, and probably also by Timon. The five Tropes are as follows.



(i) The one based upon discord.

(ii) The regressus in infinitum.

(iii) Relation.

(iv) The hypothetical.

(v) The circulus in probando.



Two of these are taken from the old list, the first and the third, and Sextus says that the five Tropes are intended to supplement the ten Tropes, and to show the audacity of the Dogmatics in a variety of ways. The order of these Tropes is the same with Diogenes as with Sextus, but the definitions of them differ sufficiently to show that the two authors took their material from different sources. According to the first one everything in question is either sensible or intellectual, and in attempting to judge it either in life, practically, or "among philosophers," a position is developed from which it is impossible to reach a conclusion. According to the second, every proof requires another proof, and so on to infinity, and there is no standpoint from which to begin the reasoning. According to the third, all perceptions are relative, as the object is colored by the condition of the judge, and the influence of other things around it. According to the fourth, it is impossible to escape from the regressus in infinitum by making a hypothesis the starting point, as the Dogmatics attempt to do. And the fifth, or the circulus in probando, arises when that which should be the proof needs to be sustained by the thing to be proved.

Sextus claims that all things can be included in these Tropes, whether sensible or intellectual. For whether, as some say, only the things of sense are true, or as others claim, only those of the understanding, or as still others contend, some things both of sense and understanding are true, a discord must arise that is impossible to be judged, for it cannot be judged by the sensible, nor by the intellectual, for the things of the intellect themselves require a proof; accordingly, the result of all reasoning must be either hypothetical, or fall into the regressus in infinitum or the circulus in probando. The reference above to some who say that only the things of sense are true, is to Epicurus and Protagoras; to some that only the things of thought are true, to Democritus and Plato; and to those that claimed some of both to be true, to the Stoics and the Peripatetics. The three new Tropes added by Agrippa have nothing to do with sense-perception, but bear entirely upon the possibility of reasoning, as demanded by the science of logic, in contrast to the earlier ones which related almost entirely, with the exception of the tenth, to material objects. Sextus claims that these five Tropes also lead to the suspension of judgment, but their logical result is rather the dogmatic denial of all possibility of knowledge, showing as Hirzel has well demonstrated, far more the influence of the New Academy than the spirit of the Sceptical School. It was the standpoint of the older Sceptics, that although the search for the truth had not yet succeeded, yet they were still seekers, and Sextus claims to be faithful to this old aim of the Pyrrhonists. He calls himself a seeker, and in reproaching the New Academy for affirming that knowledge is impossible, Sextus says, "Moreover, we say that our ideas are equal as regards trustworthiness and untrustworthiness." The ten Tropes claim to establish doubt only in regard to a knowledge of the truth, but the five Tropes of Agrippa aim to logically prove the impossibility of knowledge. It is very strange that Sextus does not see this decided contrast in the attitude of the two sets of Tropes, and expresses his approval of those of Agrippa, in his subsequent reasoning than of any other argument.

We find here in the Sceptical School, shortly after the time of Aenesidemus, the same tendency to dogmatic teaching that—so far as the dim and shadowy history of the last years of the New Academy can be unravelled, and the separation of Pyrrhonism can be understood, at the time that the Academy passed over into eclecticism—was one of the causes of that separation.

It is true that the Tropes of Agrippa show great progress in the development of thought. They furnish an organisation of the School far superior to what went before, placing the reasoning on the firm basis of the laws of logic, and simplifying the amount of material to be used. In a certain sense Saisset is correct in saying that Agrippa contributed more than any other in completing the organisation of Scepticism, but it is not correct when we consider the true spirit of Scepticism with which the Tropes of Agrippa were not in harmony. It was through the very progress shown in the production of these Tropes that the school finally lost the strength of its position.

Not content with having reduced the number of the Tropes from ten to five, others tried to limit the number still further to two. Sextus gives us no hint of the authorship of the two Tropes. Ritter attributes them to Menodotus and his followers, and Zeller agrees with that opinion, while Saisset thinks that Agrippa was also the author of these, which is a strange theory to propound, as some of the material of the five is repeated in the two, and the same man could certainly not appear as an advocate of five, and at the same time of two Tropes.

The two Tropes are founded on the principle that anything must be known through itself or through something else. It cannot be known through itself, because of the discord existing between all things of the senses and intellect, nor can it be known through something else, as then either the regressus in infinitum or the circulus in probando follow. Diogenes Laertius does not refer to these two Tropes.

In regard to all these Tropes of the suspension of judgment, Sextus has well remarked in his introduction to them, that they are included in the eighth, or that of relation.



THE TROPES OF AETIOLOGY



The eight Tropes against causality belong chronologically before the five Tropes of Agrippa, in the history of the development of sceptical thought. They have a much closer connection with the spirit of Scepticism than the Tropes of Agrippa, including, as they do, the fundamental thought of Pyrrhonism, i.e., that the phenomena do not reveal the unknown.



The Sceptics did not deny the phenomena, but they denied that the phenomena are signs capable of being interpreted, or of revealing the reality of causes. It is impossible by a research of the signs to find out the unknown, or the explanation of things, as the Stoics and Epicureans claim. The theory of Aenesidemus which lies at the foundation of his eight Tropes against aetiology, is given to us by Photius as follows: "There are no visible signs of the unknown, and those who believe in its existence are the victims of a vain illusion." This statement of Aenesidemus is confirmed by a fuller explanation of it given later on by Sextus. If phenomena are not signs of the unknown there is no causality, and a refutation of causality is a proof of the impossibility of science, as all science is the science of causes, the power of studying causes from effects, or as Sextus calls them, phenomena.

It is very noticeable to any one who reads the refutation of causality by Aenesidemus, as given by Sextus, that there is no reference to the strongest argument of modern Scepticism, since the time of Hume, against causality, namely that the origin of the idea of causality cannot be so accounted for as to justify our relying upon it as a form of cognition.

The eight Tropes are directed against the possibility of knowledge of nature, which Aenesidemus contested against in all his Tropes, the ten as well as the eight. They are written from a materialistic standpoint. These Tropes are given with illustrations by Fabricius as follows:



I. Since aetiology in general refers to things that are unseen, it does not give testimony that is incontestable in regard to phenomena. For example, the Pythagoreans explain the distance of the planets by a musical proportion.



II. From many equally plausible reasons which might be given for the same thing, one only is arbitrarily chosen, as some explain the inundation of the Nile by a fall of snow at its source, while there could be other causes, as rain, or wind, or the action of the sun.



III. Things take place in an orderly manner, but the causes presented do not show any order, as for example, the motion of the stars is explained by their mutual pressure, which does not take into account the order that reigns among them.



IV. The unseen things are supposed to take place in the same way as phenomena, as vision is explained in the same way as the appearance of images in a dark room.



V. Most philosophers present theories of aetiology which agree with their own individual hypotheses about the elements, but not with common and accepted ideas, as to explain the world by atoms like Epicurus, by homoeomeriae like Anaxagoras, or by matter and form like Aristotle.



VI. Theories are accepted which agree with individual hypotheses, and others equally probable are passed by, as Aristotle's explanation of comets, that they are a collection of vapors near the earth, because that coincided with his theory of the universe.



VII. Theories of aetiology are presented which conflict not only with individual hypotheses, but also with phenomena, as to admit like Epicurus an inclination or desire of the soul, which was incompatible with the necessity which he advocated.



VIII. The inscrutable is explained by things equally inscrutable, as the rising of sap in plants is explained by the attraction of a sponge for water, a fact contested by some.



Diogenes does not mention these Tropes in this form, but he gives a resumé of the general arguments of the Sceptics against aetiology, which has less in common with the eight Tropes of Aenesidemus, than with the presentation of the subject by Sextus later.

The summing up of the Tropes of Aenesidemus is given as follows, in the Hypotyposes, by Sextus:—"A cause in harmony with all the sects of philosophy, and with Scepticism, and with phenomena, is perhaps not possible, for the phenomena and the unknown altogether disagree."

It is interesting to remark in connection with the seventh of these Tropes, that Aenesidemus asserts that causality has only a subjective value, which from his materialistic standpoint was an argument against its real existence, and the same argument is used by Kant to prove that causality is a necessary condition of thought.

Chaignet characterises the Tropes of Aenesidemus as false and sophistical, but as Maccoll has well said, they are remarkable for their judicious and strong criticism, and are directed against the false method of observing facts through the light of preconceived opinion. They have, however, a stronger critical side than sceptical, and show the positive tendency of the thought of Aenesidemus.





CHAPTER IV


Aenesidemus and the Philosophy of Heraclitus





A paragraph in the First Book of the Hypotyposes which has given rise to much speculation and many different theories, is the comparison which Sextus makes of Scepticism with the philosophy of Heraclitus. In this paragraph the statement is made that Aenesidemus and his followers, οἱ περὶ τὸν Αἰνησίδημον, said that Scepticism is the path to the philosophy of Heraclitus, because the doctrine that contradictory predicates appear to be applicable to the same thing, leads the way to the one that contradictory predicates are in reality applicable to the same thing. As the Sceptics say that contradictory predicates appear to be applicable to the same thing, the Heraclitans come from this to the more positive doctrine that they are in reality so.

This connection which Aenesidemus is said to have affirmed between Scepticism and the philosophy of Heraclitus is earnestly combated by Sextus, who declares that the fact that contradictory predicates appear to be applicable to the same thing is not a dogma of the Sceptics, but a fact which presents itself to all men, and not to the Sceptics only. No one for instance, whether he be a Sceptic or not, would dare to say that honey does not taste sweet to those in health, and bitter to those who have the jaundice, so that Heraclitus begins from a preconception common to all men, as to us also, and perhaps to the other schools of philosophy as well. As the statement concerning the appearance of contradictory predicates in regard to the same thing is not an exclusively sceptical one, then Scepticism is no more a path to the philosophy of Heraclitus than to other schools of philosophy, or to life, as all use common subject matter. "But we are afraid that the Sceptical School not only does not help towards the knowledge of the philosophy of Heraclitus, but even hinders that result. Since the Sceptic accuses Heraclitus of having rashly dogmatized, presenting on the one hand the doctrine of 'conflagration' and on the other that 'contradictory predicates are in reality applicable to the same thing.'" "It is absurd, then, to say that this conflicting school is a path to the sect with which it conflicts. It is therefore absurd to say that the Sceptical School is a path to the philosophy of Heraclitus."

This is not the only place in the writings of Sextus which states that Aenesidemus at some time of his life was an advocate of the doctrines of Heraclitus. In no instance, however, where Sextus refers to this remarkable fact, does he offer any explanation of it, or express any bitterness against Aenesidemus, whom he always speaks of with respect as a leader of the Sceptical School. We are thus furnished with one of the most difficult problems of ancient Scepticism, the problem of reconciling the apparent advocacy of Aenesidemus of the teachings of Heraclitus with his position in the Sceptical School.

A comparison with each other of the references made by Sextus and other writers to the teachings of Aenesidemus, and a consideration of the result, gives us two pictures of Aenesidemus which conflict most decidedly with each other. We have on the one hand, the man who was the first to give Pyrrhonism a position as an influential school, and the first to collect and present to the world the results of preceding Sceptical thought. He was the compiler of the ten Tropes of ἐποχή, and perhaps in part their author, and the author of the eight Tropes against aetiology. He develops his Scepticism from the standpoint that neither the senses nor the intellect can give us any certain knowledge of reality. He denied the possibility of studying phenomena as signs of the unknown. He denied all possibility of truth, and the reality of motion, origin and decay. There was according to his teaching no pleasure or happiness, and no wisdom or supreme good. He denied the possibility of finding out the nature of things, or of proving the existence of the gods, and finally he declared that no ethical aim is possible.



The picture on the other hand, presented to us by Sextus and Tertullian, is that of a man with a system of beliefs and dogmas, which lead, he says, to the philosophy of Heraclitus. In strange contradiction to his assertion of the impossibility of all knowledge, he advocates a theory that the original substance is air, which is most certainly a dogma, although indeed a deviation from the teachings of Heraclitus, of which Sextus seemed unconscious. Aenesidemus dogmatized also regarding number and time and unity of the original world-stuff. He seems to have dogmatized further about motion, and about the soul.

If Sextus' language is taken according to its apparent meaning, we find ourselves here in the presence of a system of beliefs which would be naturally held by a follower of the Stoic-Heraclitan physics, and absolutely inexplicable from the standpoint of a man who advocated so radical a Scepticism as Aenesidemus. Sextus in the passage that we first quoted, expresses great indignation against the idea that Scepticism could form the path to the philosophy of Heraclitus, but he does not express surprise or indignation against Aenesidemus personally, or offer any explanation of the apparent contradiction; and while his writings abound in references to him as a respected leader of the Sceptical School, he sometimes seems to include him with the Dogmatics. In fact, the task of presenting any consistent history of the development of thought through which Aenesidemus passed is such a puzzling one, that Brochard brilliantly remarks that possibly the best attitude to take towards it would be to follow the advice of Aenesidemus himself, and suspend one's judgment altogether regarding it. Is it possible to suppose that so sharp and subtle a thinker as Aenesidemus held at the same time such opposing opinions?

The conjecture that he was first a Heraclitan Stoic, and later a Sceptic, which might be possible, does not offer any explanation of Sextus' statement, that he regarded Scepticism as a path to the philosophy of Heraclitus. Nor would it be logical to think that after establishing the Sceptical School in renewed influence and power, he reverted to the Heraclitan theories as they were modified by the Stoics. These same theories were the cause of his separation from the Academy, for his chief accusation against the Academy was that it was adopting the dogmatism of the Stoics. The matter is complicated by the fact that Tertullian also attributes to Aenesidemus anthropological and physical teachings that agree with the Stoical Heraclitan doctrines. It is not strange that in view of these contradictory assertions in regard to the same man, some have suggested the possibility that they referred to two different men of the same name, a supposition, however, that no one has been able to authoritatively vindicate.

Let us consider briefly some of the explanations which have been attempted of the apparent heresy of Aenesidemus towards the Sceptical School. We will begin with the most ingenious, that of Pappenheim.

Pappenheim claims that Sextus was not referring to Aenesidemus himself in these statements which he joins with his name. In the most important of these, the one quoted from the Hypotyposes, which represents Aenesidemus as claiming that Scepticism is the path to the philosophy of Heraclitus and in many of the other places where Sextus refers to the dogmatic statements of Aenesidemus, while when Sextus quotes Aenesidemus to sustain Scepticism, he uses his name alone.

Pappenheim thinks that Sextus' conflict was not with the dead Aenesidemus, who had lived two centuries before him, but with his own contemporaries. He also seeks to prove that Sextus could not have gained his knowledge of these sayings of Aenesidemus from any of Aenesidemus' own writings, as neither by the ancients, nor by later writers, was any book spoken of which could well have contained them. Neither Aristocles nor Diogenes mentions any such book.

Pappenheim also makes much of the argument that Sextus in no instance seems conscious of inconsistency on the part of Aenesidemus, even when most earnestly combating his alleged teachings, but in referring to him personally he always speaks of him with great respect.

Pappenheim suggests, accordingly, that the polemic of Sextus was against contemporaries, those who accepted the philosophy of Heraclitus in consequence of, or in some connection with, the teachings of Aenesidemus. He entirely ignores the fact that there is no trace of any such school or sect in history, calling themselves followers of "Aenesidemus according to Heraclitus," but still thinks it possible that such a movement existed in Alexandria at the time of Sextus, where so many different sects were found.

Pappenheim advances the theory that some of these contemporaries against whom Sextus directed his arguments had written a book to prove the harmony between Aenesidemus and Heraclitus, and that it was from this book that Sextus quoted the dogmatic statements which he introduced with that formula. He claims, further, that the passage quoted from Hypotyposes I even, is directed against contemporaries, who founded their system of proofs of the harmony between Aenesidemus and Heraclitus on the connection of the celebrated formula which was such a favourite with the Sceptics: "Contrary predicates appear to apply to the same thing," with the apparent deduction from this, that "Contrary predicates in reality apply to the same thing." Sextus wishes, according to Pappenheim, to prove to these contemporaries that they had misunderstood Aenesidemus, and Sextus does not report Aenesidemus to be a Dogmatic, nor to have taught the doctrines of Heraclitus; neither has he misunderstood Aenesidemus, nor consequently misrepresented him; but on the contrary, these dogmatic quotations have nothing to do with Aenesidemus, but refer altogether to contemporaries who pretended to be Sceptics while they accepted the teachings of Heraclitus. Sextus naturally warmly combats this tendency, as he wishes to preserve Pyrrhonism pure.

Brochard advocates a change of opinion on the part of Aenesidemus as an explanation of the difficulty in question. He starts from the supposition, the reasonableness of which we shall consider later, that Aenesidemus had passed through one change of opinion already when he severed his connection with the New Academy; and to the two phases of his life, which such a change has already made us familiar with, he adds a third. Aenesidemus would not be the first who has accepted different beliefs at different periods of his life, and Brochard claims that such a development in the opinions of Aenesidemus is logical. He does not accuse Aenesidemus of having, as might seem from the perusal of Sextus, suddenly changed his basis, but rather of having gradually come to accept much in the teachings of Heraclitus. Aenesidemus modifies his Scepticism only to the extent of pretending to know something of absolute reality. The Sceptic says, "Contradictory predicates are apparently applicable to the same thing," and Aenesidemus accepts the Heraclitan result—"Contradictory predicates are in reality applicable to the same thing." From Sextus' report, Aenesidemus would seem to have renounced his position as a Sceptic in saying that Scepticism is the path to the philosophy of Heraclitus. He does not, however, renounce Scepticism, but he finds it incomplete. In deliberating concerning the appearance of contradictory predicates in regard to the same object, he would naturally ask, "Whence come these contradictory appearances?" After having doubted all things, he wished to know wherefore he doubts. The system of Heraclitus offers a solution, and he accepts it. Contradictory predicates produce equilibrium in the soul because they are an expression of reality.

As a Sceptic he claims that knowledge is impossible, and he does not find that the statement of Heraclitus disproves this, but rather that it supports his theory. He had denied the existence of science. He still does so, but now he knows why he denies it. Brochard asks why it is any more impossible that Aenesidemus should have been a follower of Heraclitus than that Protagoras was so, as Protagoras was after all a Sceptic. In conclusion, Brochard claims that the dogmatic theories attributed to Aenesidemus relate to the doctrine of the truth of contradictory predicates, which seemed to him a logical explanation of the foundation theories of Scepticism. It is right to call him a Sceptic, for he was so, and that sincerely; and he deserves his rank as one of the chiefs of the Sceptical School.



Coming now to the opinion of Zeller, we find that he advocates a misconception of Aenesidemus on the part of Sextus. The whole difficulty is removed, Zeller thinks, by the simple fact that Sextus had not understood Aenesidemus; and as Tertullian and Sextus agree in this misconception of the views of Aenesidemus, they must have been misled by consulting a common author in regard to Aenesidemus, who confused what Aenesidemus said of Heraclitus with his own opinion. Zeller maintains that the expression so often repeated by Sextus—Αἰνησίδημος καθ᾽ Ἡράκλειτον —shows that some one of Aenesidemus' books contained a report of Heraclitus' doctrines, as Aenesidemus was in the habit of quoting as many authorities as possible to sustain his Scepticism. To justify his quotations from Heraclitus, he had possibly given a short abstract of Heraclitus' teachings; and the misconception advocated by Zeller and found both in Tertullian and Sextus, refers rather to the spirit than to the words quoted from Aenesidemus, and is a misconception due to some earlier author, who had given a false impression of the meaning of Aenesidemus in quoting what Aenesidemus wrote about Heraclitus. That is to say, Heraclitus was classed by Aenesidemus only among those who prepared the way for Scepticism, just as Diogenes mentions many philosophers in that way; and that Soranus and Sextus both had the same misunderstanding can only be explained by a mistake on the part of the authority whom they consulted.

This explanation, however, makes Sextus a very stupid man. Aenesidemus' books were well known, and Sextus would most certainly take the trouble to read them. His reputation as an historian would not sustain such an accusation, as Diogenes calls his books τὰ δέκα τῶν σκεπτικῶν καὶ ἄλλα κάλλιστα. Furthermore, that Sextus used Aenesidemus' own books we know from the direct quotation from them in regard to Plato, which he combines with the ideas of Menodotus and his own.

Sextus' references to Aenesidemus in connection with Heraclitus are very numerous, and it is absurd to suppose that he would have trusted entirely to some one who reported him for authority on such a subject. Even were it possible that Sextus did not refer directly to the works of Aenesidemus, which we do not admit, even then, there had been many writers in the Sceptical School since the time of Aenesidemus, and they certainly could not all have misrepresented him. We must remember that Sextus was at the head of the School, and had access to all of its literature. His honor would not allow of such a mistake, and if he had indeed made it, his contemporaries must surely have discovered it before Diogenes characterised his books as κάλλιστα. Whatever may be said against the accuracy of Sextus as a general historian of philosophy, especially in regard to the older schools, he cannot certainly be accused of ignorance respecting the school of which he was at that time the head.

The opinion of Ritter on this subject is that Aenesidemus must have been a Dogmatic. Saisset contends that Aenesidemus really passed from the philosophy of Heraclitus to that of Pyrrho, and made the statement that Scepticism is the path to the philosophy of Heraclitus to defend his change of view, although in his case the change had been just the opposite to the one he defends. Saisset propounds as a law in the history of philosophy a fact which he claims to be true, that Scepticism always follows sensationalism, for which he gives two examples, Pyrrho, who was first a disciple of Democritus, and Hume, who was a disciple of Locke It is not necessary to discuss the absurdity of such a law, which someone has well remarked would involve an a priori construction of history. There is no apparent reason for Saisset's conjecture in regard to Aenesidemus, for it is exactly the opposite of what Sextus has reported. Strange to say, Saisset himself remarks in another place that we owe religious respect to any text, and that it should be the first law of criticism to render this. Such respect to the text of Sextus, as he himself advocates, puts Saisset's explanation of the subject under discussion out of the question.

Hirzel and Natorp do not find such a marked contradiction in the two views presented of the theories of Aenesidemus, nor do they think that Sextus has misrepresented them. They rather maintain, that in declaring the coexistence of contradictory predicates regarding the same object, Aenesidemus does not cease to be a Sceptic, for he did not believe that the predicates are applicable in a dogmatic sense of the word, but are only applicable in appearance, that is, applicable to phenomena. The Heraclitism of Aenesidemus would be then only in appearance, as he understood the statement, that "Contradictory predicates are in reality applicable to the same thing," only in the phenomenal sense. Hirzel says in addition, that contradictory predicates are in reality applicable to those phenomena which are the same for all, and consequently true, for Aenesidemus considered those phenomena true that are the same for all. As Protagoras, the disciple of Heraclitus, declared the relative character of sensations, that things exist only for us, and that their nature depends on our perception of them; so, in the phenomenal sense, Aenesidemus accepts the apparent fact that contradictory predicates in reality apply to the same thing.

This explanation entirely overlooks the fact that we have to do with the word ὑπάρχειν, in the statement that contradictory predicates in reality apply to the same thing; while in the passage quoted where Aenesidemus declares common phenomena to be true ones, we have the word ἀληθῆ, so that this explanation of the difficulty would advocate a very strange use of the word ὑπάρχειν.

All of these different views of the possible solution of this perplexing problem are worthy of respect, as the opinion of men who have given much thought to this and other closely Belated subjects. While we may not altogether agree with any one of them, they nevertheless furnish many suggestions, which are very valuable in helping to construct a theory on the subject that shall satisfactorily explain the difficulties, and present a consistent view of the attitude of Aenesidemus.

First, in regard to the Greek expression οἱ περὶ in connection with proper names, upon which Pappenheim bases so much of his argument. All Greek scholars would agree that the expression does not apply usually only to the disciples of any teacher, but οἱ περὶ τὸν Αἰνησίδημον, for instance, includes Aenesidemus with his followers, and is literally translated, "Aenesidemus and his followers." It is noticeable, however, in the writings of Sextus that he uses the expression οἱ περὶ often for the name of the founder of a school alone, as Pappenheim himself admits. We find examples of this in the mention of Plato and Democritus and Arcesilaus, as οἱ περὶ τὸν Πλάτωνα καὶ Δημόκριτον and οἱ περὶ τὸν Ἀρκεσίλαον, and accordingly we have no right to infer that his use of the name Aenesidemus in this way has an exceptional significance. It may mean Aenesidemus alone, or it may signify Aenesidemus in connection with his followers.

In reply to Zeller's position, that Sextus and Tertullian have misunderstood Aenesidemus, and quote from some common author who misrepresents him, we would admit that such a misunderstanding might be possible where Sextus gives long explanations of Heraclitus' teachings, beginning with quoting Aenesidemus, and continuing in such a way that it is not always possible to distinguish just the part that is attributed to Aenesidemus; but such a misunderstanding certainly cannot be asserted in regard to the direct statement that Aenesidemus regarded Scepticism as the path to the philosophy of Heraclitus, for the reasons previously given. Neither would we agree with Brochard, whose solution of the difficulty is on the whole the most logical, i.e., that Aenesidemus had necessarily already passed through two phases of philosophical belief. It is possible to admit a gradual evolution of thought in Aenesidemus without supposing in either case a change of basis. His withdrawal from the Academy is an argument against, rather than in favor of a change on his part, and was caused by the well-known change in the attitude of the Academy.

Many of the teachings of the Sceptical School were taken directly from the Academy, belonging to those doctrines advocated in the Academy before the eclectic dogmatic tendency introduced by Antiochus. In fact, Sextus himself claims a close relation between the Middle Academy and Pyrrhonism. Aenesidemus, although he was a Sceptic, belonged to the Academy, and on leaving it became, as it were, a pioneer in Pyrrhonism, and cannot be judged in the same way as we should judge a Sceptic of Sextus' time.

It seems a self-evident fact that during the two centuries which elapsed between the time of Aenesidemus and Sextus, the standpoint of judgment in the Sceptical School had greatly changed. An example illustrating this change we find in a comparison of the presentation of Scepticism by Diogenes with that of Sextus. The author Whom Diogenes follows, probably one of the Sceptical writers, considers Xenophanes, Zeno, and Democritus, Sceptics, and also Plato, while Sextus, in regard to all of these men, opposes the idea that they were Sceptics. Diogenes also calls Heraclitus a Sceptic, and even Homer, and quotes sceptical sayings from the Seven Wise Men; he includes in the list of Sceptics, Archilochus, Euripides, Empedocles, and Hippocrates, and, furthermore, says that Theodosius, probably one of the younger Sceptics, objected to the name 'Pyrrhonean' on the ground that Pyrrho was not the first Sceptic.

We have given the testimony from many sources to the effect that before the time of Sextus the Empirical School of Medicine was considered identical with Scepticism, although not so by Sextus himself. From all of these things we may infer a narrowing of the limits of Pyrrhonism in the time of Sextus.

Let us accept with Brochard the development of thought seen in Aenesidemus from the beginning to the end of his career, without agreeing with him that Aenesidemus ever consciously changed his basis. He was a Sceptic in the Academy. He left the Academy on that account, and he remained a Sceptic to the end, in so far as a man can be a Sceptic, and take the positive stand that Aenesidemus did.



Two things might account for his apparent dogmatism—



(i) The eclectic spirit of his time.

(ii) The psychological effect upon himself of this careful systemisation of the Sceptical teachings.



Let us consider the first of these causes. Aenesidemus, although not the first of the later Sceptics, was apparently the first to separate himself from the Academy. He was the founder of a new movement, the attempt to revive the older Scepticism as taught by Pyrrho and Timon, and separate it from the dogmatic teachings of the Stoics which were so greatly affecting the Scepticism of the New Academy. It was the spirit of his time to seek to sustain all philosophical teaching by the authority of as many as possible of the older philosophers, and he could hardly escape the tendency which his training in the Academy had unconsciously given him. Therefore we find him trying to prove that the philosophy of Heraclitus follows from Scepticism. It is not necessary either to explain the matter, as both Hirzel and Natorp so ingeniously attempt to do, by claiming that the truth of contradictory predicates which Aenesidemus accepted from Heraclitus referred only to phenomena. The history of philosophy gives us abundant proof of the impossibility of absolute Scepticism, and Aenesidemus furnishes us with one example of many of this impossibility, and of the dogmatism that must exist in connection with all thought. In the case of Aenesidemus, who evidently gave the best efforts of his life to establish the Sceptical School, the dogmatism was probably unconscious. That he remained to the end a Sceptic is shown by the fact that he was known as such to posterity. Nowhere do we find a change of basis referred to in regard to him, and Sextus, in refuting the mistakes which he attributes to Aenesidemus, does it, as it were, to point out something of which Aenesidemus had been unconscious.

Let us consider here the second cause of Aenesidemus' Dogmatism, the psychological effect upon himself of formulating Sceptical beliefs. The work that he did for the Sceptical School was a positive one. It occupied years of his life, and stamped itself upon his mental development. In formulating Scepticism, and in advocating it against the many enemies of the School, and amidst all the excitement of the disruption from the Academy, and of establishing a new School, it was inevitable that his mind should take a dogmatic tendency. He remained a Sceptic as he had always been, but must have grown dogmatic in his attitude towards the Sceptical formulae, and was thus able to adopt some of the teachings of Heraclitus, unconscious of their inconsistency.

Where should we find a modern writer who is consistent in all his statements? Could we read the works of Aenesidemus, we might better understand the connection between the apparently contradictory ideas in his teaching, but the inconsistencies in statement would probably remain. It is necessary to remember the position of Aenesidemus in breaking away from the Academy and in founding a new school, the full significance of which he could not foresee. There must necessarily be some crudeness in pioneer work, and some failure to see the bearing of all its parts, and a compiler like Sextus could point out the inconsistencies which the two centuries since the time of Aenesidemus had made plain. Aenesidemus was too positive a character to admit of absolute Sceptical consistency. He was nevertheless the greatest thinker the Sceptical School had known since the age of Pyrrho, its founder. In claiming a union between Pyrrhonism and the philosophy of Heraclitus, he recognised also the pre-Socratic tendency of the Sceptical School. The name of Socrates was all powerful in the Academy, but Aenesidemus comprehended the fact that the true spirit of Pyrrhonism was of earlier origin than the Academic Scepsis.





CHAPTER V


Critical Examination of Pyrrhonism





The distinct philosophical movement of which Pyrrho was the author bore his name for five centuries after his death. It had an acknowledged existence as a philosophical tendency, if indeed not a sect, for a great part of that time. Yet, when we carefully analyse the relation of Pyrrhonism, as presented to us by Sextus, to the teachings of Pyrrho himself, in so far as they can be known, we find many things in Pyrrhonism for which Pyrrho was not responsible.

The foundation elements of the movement, the spirit of Empirical doubt that lay underneath and caused its development in certain directions rather than others, are due to Pyrrho. The methods of the school, however, were very foreign to anything found in the life or teachings of Pyrrho. Pyrrho was eminently a moralist. He was also to a great degree an ascetic, and he lived his philosophy, giving it thus a positive side wanting in the Pyrrhonism presented to us by Sextus.

Pyrrho wished more than anything else to live in peace, and his dislike of the Sophists may well have made him try to avoid dialectic; while, on the contrary, in the Pyrrhonean School of later times discussion was one of the principal methods of contest, at least after the time of Agrippa. Pyrrhonism seems to have been originally a theory of life, like the philosophy of Socrates, to whom Pyrrho is often compared, and Pyrrho, like Socrates, lived his philosophy. Our knowledge of Pyrrho is gained from Aristocles, Sextus Empiricus, and Diogenes, and from the Academic traditions given by Cicero. Diogenes gives us details of his life which he attributes to Antigonus of Carystius, who lived about the time of Pyrrho. Pyrrho was a disciple and admirer of Democritus, some of whose teachings bore a lasting influence over the subsequent development of Pyrrhonism. He accompanied Alexander the Great to India, where he remained as a member of his suite for some time, and the philosophical ideas of India were not without influence on his teachings. Oriental philosophy was not unknown in Greece long before the time of Pyrrho, but his personal contact with the Magi and the Gymnosophists of the far East, apparently impressed upon his mind teachings for which he was not unprepared by his previous study and natural disposition. In his indifference to worldly goods we find a strong trace of the Buddhistic teaching regarding the vanity of human life. He showed also a similar hopelessness in regard to the possibility of finding a satisfactory philosophy, or absolute truth. He evidently returned from India with the conviction that truth was not to be attained.

After the death of Alexander and Pyrrho's return to Greece, he lived quietly with his sister at Elis, and Diogenes says that he was consistent in his life, asserting and denying nothing, but in everything withholding his opinion, as nothing in itself is good or shameful, just or unjust. He was not a victim of false pride, but sold animals in the market place, and, if necessary, washed the utensils himself. He lived in equality of spirit, and practised his teachings with serenity. If one went out while he was talking he paid no attention, but went calmly on with his remarks. He liked to live alone, and to travel alone, and on one occasion, being knocked about in a vessel by a storm at sea, he did not lose his imperturbability, but pointed to a swine calmly eating on board, and said that the wise man should have as much calmness of soul as that. He endured difficult surgical operations with indifference, and when his friend Anaxarchus was once unfortunate enough to fall into a morass, he went calmly by without stopping to help him, for which consistency of conduct Anaxarchus afterwards praised him. There are two instances given by Diogenes when he lost control of himself; once in getting angry with his sister, and once in trying to save himself when chased by a dog. When accused of inconsistency, he said it was difficult to entirely give up one's humanity. He was greatly venerated by the people among whom he lived, who made him high priest, and on his account exempted all philosophers from taxation, and after his death erected a statue to his memory. These facts testify to his moral character, and also to fulfil the functions of high priest a certain amount of dogmatism must have been necessary.

According to Diogenes, "We cannot know," said Pyrrho, "what things are in themselves, either by sensation or by judgment, and, as we cannot distinguish the true from the false, therefore we should live impassively, and without an opinion." Nothing is, in itself, one thing more than another, but all experience is related to phenomena, and no knowledge is possible through the senses.

The picture given of Pyrrho by Cicero is entirely different from that of Diogenes, and contrasts decidedly with it. Cicero knows Pyrrho as a severe moralist, not as a Sceptic. Both authors attribute to Pyrrho the doctrine of indifference and apathy, but, according to Cicero, Pyrrho taught of virtue, honesty, and the summum bonum, while Diogenes plainly tells us that he considered nothing as good in itself, "and of all things nothing as true." Cicero does not once allude to Pyrrhonean doubt. We see on the one hand, in Cicero's idea of Pyrrho, the influence of the Academy, perhaps even of Antiochus himself, which probably colored the representations given of Pyrrho; but, on the other hand, there is much in Diogenes' account of Pyrrho's life and teachings, and in the writings of Timon, which shows us the positive side of Pyrrho. Pyrrho, in denying the possibility of all knowledge, made that rather a motive for indifference in the relations of life, than the foundation thought of a philosophical system. His teaching has a decided ethical side, showing in that respect the strong influence of Democritus over him, who, like Pyrrho, made happiness to consist in a state of feeling. The one motive of all of Pyrrho's teaching is a positive one, the desire for happiness.

The essence of Pyrrhonism as given by Timon is as follows: Man desires to be happy. To realise his desire he must consider three things:



(i) What is the nature of things?

(ii) How should man conduct himself in relation to them?

(iii) What is the result to him of this relation?



The nature of things is unknown. Our relation to them must be one of suspension of judgment, without activity, desire, or belief,—that is, an entirely negative relation.

The problem of philosophy is here proposed very nearly in the terms of Kant, but not with the positive motive, like that of the great philosopher of Germany, of evolving a system to present the truth. Yet the importance of these questions shows the originality of Pyrrho. The earnestness of Pyrrho is further shown by an example given by Diogenes. Once on being found talking to himself alone, he said, when asked the reason, that he was meditating how to become a good man, thus showing an entirely different spirit from anything found in Sextus' books. The explanation of his life and teachings is to be found largely in his own disposition. Such an attitude of indifference must belong to a placid nature, and cannot be entirely the result of a philosophical system, and, while it can be aimed at, it can never be perfectly imitated. One of his disciples recognised this, and said that it was necessary to have the disposition of Pyrrho in order to hold his doctrines. Diogenes tells us that he was the first to advance any formulae of Scepticism, but they must have been very elementary, as Pyrrho himself wrote nothing. We find no trace of formulated Tropes in Pyrrho's teachings, yet it is probable that he indicated some of the contradictions in sensation, and possibly the Tropes in some rudimentary form. We know from Diogenes that Protagoras is the authority for saying that in regard to everything there are two opposing arguments. The saying "to determine nothing" is quoted from Timon's Python by Diogenes, and the other two mentioned are also attributed to him by Aristocles. It would seem probable that Pyrrho used all of these sayings, from the account of Diogenes, and that even then they gave rise to the accusation of the Dogmatics, that simply by possessing such sayings the Sceptics dogmatized, for the refutation of this used by Sextus occurs in the old account of the sayings, namely, that these formulae include also themselves in the meaning, as a cathartic removes itself together with other harmful objects.

In comparing the later Pyrrhonism with the teachings of Pyrrho, we would sharply contrast the moral attitude of the two. With Pyrrho equilibrium of soul was a means to be applied to his positive theory of life; with the later Pyrrhoneans it was the end to be attained. We would attribute, however, the empirical tendency shown during the whole history of Pyrrhonism to Pyrrho as its originator. He was an empirical philosopher, and the result of his influence in this respect, as seen in the subsequent development of the school, stands in marked contrast to the dialectic spirit of the Academic Scepsis. The empiricism of the school is shown in its scientific lore, in the fact that so many of the Sceptics were physicians, and in the character of the ten Tropes. We may safely affirm that the foundation principles of Pyrrhonism are due to Pyrrho, and the originality which gave the school its power. The elaborated arguments, however, and the details of its formulae belong to later times.

Coming now to the relation of Pyrrhonism to the Academy, the connection between the two is difficult to exactly determine, between the time of Pyrrho and that of Aenesidemus. Scepticism in the Academy was, however, never absolutely identical with Pyrrhonism, although at certain periods of the history of the Academy the difference was slight. We can trace throughout the evolution of doubt, as shown to us in Pyrrhonism, and in Academic Scepticism, the different results which followed the difference in origin of the two movements, and these differences followed according to general laws of development of thought. Arcesilaus, who introduced doubt into the Academy, claimed to return to the dialectic of Socrates, and suppressing the lectures, which were the method of teaching in the later schools of philosophy, introduced discussions instead, as being more decidedly a Socratic method. Although, according to Sextus, he was the one leader of the Academy whose Scepticism most nearly approached that of Pyrrhonism, yet underneath his whole teaching lay that dialectic principle so thoroughly in opposition to the empiricism of Pyrrho. The belief of Socrates and Plato in the existence of absolute truth never entirely lost its influence over the Academy, but was like a hidden germ, destined to reappear after Scepticism had passed away. It finally led the Academy back to Dogmatism, and prepared the way for the Eclecticism with which it disappeared from history.

The history of Pyrrhonism and that of Academic Scepticism were for a time contemporaneous. The immediate follower of Pyrrho, Timon, called by Sextus the "prophet of Pyrrho," was a contemporary of Arcesilaus. That he did not consider the Scepticism of the Academy identical with Pyrrhonism is proved from the fact that he did not himself join the Academy, but was, on the contrary, far from doing so. That he regarded Arcesilaus as a Dogmatic is evident from his writings. One day, on seeing the chief of the Academy approaching, he cried out, "What are you doing here among us who are free?" After the death of Timon, the Pyrrhonean School had no representative till the time of Ptolemy of Cyrene, and Greek Scepticism was represented by the Academy. That Pyrrho had a strong influence over Arcesilaus, the founder of the Middle Academy, is evident; but there was also never a time when the Academy entirely broke away from all the teachings of Plato, even in their deepest doubt. It is true that Arcesilaus removed, nominally as well as in spirit, some of the dialogues of Plato from the Academy, but only those that bore a dogmatic character, while those that presented a more decided Socratic mode of questioning without reaching any decided result, men regarded as authority for Scepticism.

Sextus does not deny that Arcesilaus was almost a Pyrrhonean, but he claims that his Pyrrhonism was only apparent, and not real, and was used as a cloak to hide his loyalty to the teachings of Plato. As Ariston said of him, "Plato before, Pyrrho behind, Diodorus in the middle." Sextus also characterises the method of Arcesilaus as dialectic, and we know from Cicero that it was his pride to pretend to return to the dialectic of Socrates.

It is interesting to note that Sextus, in his refutation of the position that the Academy is the same as Pyrrhonism, takes up the entire development of Academic thought from the time of Plato till that of Antiochus, and does not limit the argument to Scepticism under Arcesilaus. The claim made by some that the two schools were the same, is stated by him, and the word 'some' probably refers to members of both schools at different periods of their history. Sextus recognises three Academies, although he remarks that some make even a further division, calling that of Philo and Charmides, the fourth, and that of Antiochus and his followers, the fifth.

That many in the Academy, and even outside of it, regarded Plato as a Sceptic, and an authority for subsequent Scepticism, we find both from Sextus and Diogenes. As Lewes justly remarks, one could well find authority for Scepticism in the works of Plato, as indeed the Academicians did, but not when the sum total of his teachings was considered. The spirit of Plato's teachings was dogmatic, as Sextus most decidedly recognises, and as Aenesidemus and Menodotus recognised before him. Sextus himself shows us that Plato's idealism and ethical teachings can have nothing in common with Scepticism, for if he accepts the desirability of the virtuous life, and the existence of Providence, he dogmatizes; and if he even regards them as probable, he gives preference to one set of ideas over another, and departs from the sceptical character. Sextus characterises the sceptical side of Plato's writings as mental gymnastics, which do not authorise his being called a Sceptic, and affirms that Plato is not a Sceptic, since he prefers some unknown things to others in trustworthiness. The ethical difference underlying the teachings of the Academy and Pyrrhonism, Sextus was very quick to see, and although it is very probable that the part of the Hypotyposes which defines the difference between the Academy and Pyrrhonism may be largely quoted from the introduction to Aenesidemus' works, yet Sextus certainly gives these statements the strong stamp of his approval. He condemns the Academy because of the theory that good and evil exist, or if this cannot be decidedly proved, yet that it is more probable that what is called good exists than the contrary.

The whole Academic teaching of probabilities contradicted the standpoint of the Sceptics—that our ideas are equal as regards trustworthiness and untrustworthiness, for the Academicians declared that some ideas are probable and some improbable, and they make a difference even in those ideas that they call probable.

Sextus claims that there are three fundamental grounds of difference between Pyrrhonism and the Academy. The first is the doctrine of probability which the Academicians accept in regard to the superior trustworthiness of some ideas over others. The second is the different way in which the two schools follow their teachers. The Pyrrhoneans follow without striving or strong effort, or even strong inclination, as a child follows his teacher, while the Academicians follow with sympathy and assent, as Carneades and Clitomachus affirm. The third difference is in the aim, for the Academicians follow what is probable in life. The Sceptics follow nothing, but live according to laws, customs, and natural feelings undogmatically.

The difference between the later teaching of the Academy and Pyrrhonism is evident, and Sextus treats of it briefly, as not requiring discussion, as Philo taught that the nature of facts is incomprehensible, and Antiochus transferred the Stoa to the Academy. It is therefore evident, from the comparison which we have made, that we do not find in the Academy, with which Scepticism after the death of Timon was so long united, the exact continuance of Pyrrhonism. The philosophical enmity of the two contemporaries, Timon and Arcesilaus, the Academician who had most in common with Pyrrhonism, is an expression of the fundamental incompatibility between the two schools.

During all the chequered history of the Academy the dormant idealism was there, underlying the outward development. Although during the time of Arcesilaus and Carneades the difference was so slight as to seem a mere matter of form of expression, yet the different foundations on which the two schools stood was always recognisable. On the one hand there was the germ of idealism which was destined to awake to a new life, and on the other, the attempt at absolute negation which was to result in the final extinction of Pyrrhonism.

The Pyrrhonean believed that ideas give us no knowledge of the outer world; the Academic Sceptic believed that we cannot distinguish between true and false ideas, so such knowledge is impossible. The Pyrrhonean denied that truth could exist in ideas because of their contradictory nature, and consequently the existence of all truth. The Academic Sceptic granted that the truth was possibly contained in ideas, but affirmed that it could never be known to us. The Pyrrhoneans prided themselves on still being seekers, for although ordinary ideas are too contradictory to give knowledge of the outer world, they did not deny that such knowledge might be possible, but simply suspended the judgment regarding it. To the Pyrrhonean the result corresponded to the method. All ideas thus far known revealed nothing of the truth, therefore he still sought. The Academician tried logically to prove that the truth is impossible to find. It is the relation of the dialectician to the empiricist, and the two varieties of Scepticism are explained by their difference in origin. In Pyrrhonism there was no constructive element. In the Academic Scepsis such an element was found throughout all its history in the theory of Probability. Arcesilaus himself laid great stress upon this doctrine, which Sextus carefully shows us is utterly inconsistent with Pyrrhonism. Arcesilaus plainly teaches that, having suspended one's judgment in regard to matters of knowledge, one should control his choices, his refusals, and his actions by the probable.

After Antiochus introduced Eclecticism into the Academy, Pyrrhonism was the only representative of Greek Scepticism, and it flourished for over two centuries after our era, and then also disappeared, no more to exist as a regular philosophical school.

Having considered at length the essence of Pyrrhonism as presented by Sextus Empiricus, it now remains to briefly note the characteristics that formed its strength and weakness, and the causes of its final downfall. Herbart says that every philosopher is a Sceptic in the beginning, but every Sceptic remains always in the beginning. This remark may well be applied to Pyrrhonism. We find in its teachings many fundamental philosophical truths which might have formed the beginning of great philosophical progress, but which were never developed to any positive results. The teachings of Pyrrhonism were some of them well fitted to prepare the way to idealism. The great idea of the relativity of Vorstellungen is made very prominent by the ten Tropes of ἐποχή. Aenesidemus, in his eight Tropes against aetiology, shows the absurdity of the doctrine of causality when upheld on materialistic grounds. That was to him final. He could not divine that although the result which he presented was logical, it only led to a higher truth. It was reserved for the greatest of modern philosophers to reveal to the world that causality is a condition, and a necessary condition, of thought. When Aenesidemus proved by his seventh Trope that causality is subjective, he regarded it as fatal to the doctrine; yet this conclusion was a marked step in advance in critical philosophy, although Aenesidemus could not himself see it in all its bearings. The great difference between Aenesidemus and Kant is the difference between the materialist and the believer in subjective reality. Both agreed in the unknown nature of the Ding an sich, but this was to the Pyrrhonist the end of all his philosophy; to Kant, however, the beginning.

Pyrrhonism has rendered, notwithstanding its points of fatal weakness, marked service to the world in science, philosophy, ethics, and religion. It quickened scientific thought by emphasising empirical methods of investigation, and by criticising all results founded without sufficient data upon false hypotheses. If, instead of denying the possibility of all science because of the want of a criterion of the truth of phenomena, the Pyrrhonists had comprehended the possibility of a science of phenomena, they might have led the world in scientific progress. Their service to philosophy lay in the stimulus to thought that their frequent attacks on dogmatic beliefs occasioned. Pyrrhonism brought together all the most prominent theories of the old schools of philosophy to test their weakness and expose their contradictions, and this very process of criticism often demonstrated the power of the truth which they contained.

Sextus Empiricus was often charged by the Church Fathers with corrupting religious belief, and yet the greatest service which Pyrrhonism has rendered the world was in religious and ethical lines. This service did not, naturally, consist in destroying belief in absolute truth, as the Sceptic professed to do, but in preparing the way to find it. The bold attacks of Scepticism on all truth led men to investigate ethical and religious teachings, to examine the grounds of their belief, and to put in practical use the right of reason and free discussion.

Scepticism was the antecedent of freedom of conscience and rational criticism, and the absolute right of scientific thought. The Sceptics, however, reaped none of the benefits of their own system. They remained, as it were, always on the threshold of possible progress. With the keys to great discoveries in their hands, the doors of philosophical and scientific advancement were for ever closed to them by the limitations of their own system. The inherent weakness of Pyrrhonism lay in its psychological inconsistency and in its negative character. I think that we may safely say that Pyrrhonism was the most consistent system of Scepticism ever offered to the world, and yet it proves most decidedly that complete Scepticism is psychologically impossible. A man may give up his belief in one set of ideas, and, if they are ideas that are popularly accepted, he will be called a Sceptic, as was the case with Hume. He must, however, replace these ideas by others equally positive, and then he is no longer a Sceptic, but a Dogmatic, for he believes in something.

We have shown that the greatest thinkers of Pyrrhonism, Pyrrho, Aenesidemus, and Agrippa, were not examples of absolute Scepticism, and although Sextus Empiricus realised what consistency demanded in this respect, and affirmed on almost every page that he was asserting nothing, yet there is not a paragraph of his books in which he does not, after all, dogmatize on some subject. Complete Scepticism is contrary to the fundamental laws of language, as all use of verbs involves some affirmation. The Pyrrhonists realised this, and therefore some of them wrote nothing, like Pyrrho, their leader.

We find, accordingly, from the time of Pyrrho to Sextus, no growth in breadth of philosophical outlook, only improvement in methods. Philosophical activity can never have doubt as its aim, as that would form, as we have shown, a psychological contradiction. The true essence of Pyrrhonism was passivity, but passivity can never lead to progress. Much of the polemical work of Pyrrhonism prepared the way for scientific progress by providing a vast store of scientific data, but progress was to the Pyrrhonists impossible. They sounded their own scientific death-knell by declaring the impossibility of science, and putting an end to all theories.

The life of all scientific and philosophic progress is in the attempt to find the hidden truth. To the Sceptic there was no truth, and there could be no progress. As progress is a law in the evolution of the human race, so Scepticism as a philosophy could never be a permanent growth, any more than asceticism in religion can be a lasting influence. Both of them are only outgrowths. As the foundation principles of Scepticism were opposed to anything like real growth, it was a system that could never originate anything. Pyrrho taught from the beginning that the Sceptic must live according to law and custom; not, however, because one law or custom is better than another in itself, but simply for the sake of peace. This basis of action was itself a death-blow to all reform in social or political life. It was a selfish, negative way of seeking what was, after all, a positive thing. Life with the Pyrrhonist was phenomenal, and not phenomenal simply in regard to the outer world, but also subjectively, and no absolute knowledge of the subjective life or of personal existence was possible.

The cause of the downfall of Pyrrhonism lay in the fact that it had nothing to offer to humanity in the place of what it had destroyed. It made no appeal to human sympathies, and ignored all the highest motives to human action. The especial materialistic standpoint from which Pyrrhonism judged all that pertains to knowledge and life shut out the ideal, and all possibility of absolute truth. It was an expression of the philosophic decadence of the age when it flourished, and although it possessed some philosophic worth, yet it bore in itself the causes of its decay.





LIFE OF PYRRHO


By Diogenes Laërtius





Pyrrho of Elis was the son of Pleistarchus, as Diocles relates. According to Apollodorus in his Chronology, he was first a painter; then he studied under Stilpo's son Bryson. Afterwards he joined Anaxarchus, whom he accompanied on his travels everywhere so that he spent time with the Indian Gymnosophists (‘naked lovers of knowledge’) and with the Magi. This led him to adopt a philosophy taking the form of agnosticism and suspension of judgement. He denied that anything was honourable or dishonourable, just or unjust. And so, universally, he held that there is nothing really existent, but custom and convention govern human action; for no single thing is in itself any more this than that.

He led a life consistent with this doctrine, going out of his way for nothing, taking no precaution, but facing all risks as they came, whether carts, precipices, dogs or what not, and, generally, leaving nothing to the arbitrament of the senses; but he was kept out of harm's way by his friends who, as Antigonus of Carystus tells us, used to follow close after him. But Aenesidemus says that it was only his philosophy that was based upon suspension of judgement, and that he did not lack foresight in his everyday acts. He lived to be nearly ninety.

This is what Antigonus of Carystus says of Pyrrho in his book upon him. At first he was a poor and unknown painter, and there are still some indifferent torch-racers of his in the gymnasium at Elis. He would withdraw from the world and live in solitude, rarely showing himself to his relatives; this he did because he had heard an Indian reproach Anaxarchus, telling him that he would never be able to teach others what is good while he himself danced attendance on kings in their courts. He would maintain the same composure at all times, so that, even if you left him when he was in the middle of a speech, he would finish what he had to say with no audience but himself, although in his youth he had been hasty. Often, our informant adds, he would leave his home and, telling no one, would go roaming about with whomsoever he chanced to meet. And once, when Anaxarchus fell into a slough, he passed by without giving him any help, and, while others blamed him, Anaxarchus himself praised his indifference and sang-froid.

On being discovered once talking to himself, he answered, when asked the reason, that he was training to be good. In debate he was looked down upon by no one, for he could both discourse at length and also sustain a cross-examination, so that even Nausiphanes when a young man was captivated by him: at all events he used to say that we should follow Pyrrho in disposition but himself in doctrine; and he would often remark that Epicurus, greatly admiring Pyrrho's way of life, regularly asked him for information about Pyrrho; and that he was so respected by his native city that they made him high priest, and on his account they voted that all philosophers should be exempt from taxation.

Moreover, there were many who emulated his abstention from affairs, so that Timon in his Pytho and in his Silli says:



O Pyrrho, O aged Pyrrho, whence and how

Found'st thou escape from servitude to sophists,

Their dreams and vanities; how didst thou loose

The bonds of trickery and specious craft?

Nor reck'st thou to inquire such things as these,

What breezes circle Hellas, to what end,

And from what quarter each may chance to blow.



And again in the Conceits:



This, Pyrrho, this my heart is fain to know,

Whence peace of mind to thee doth freely flow,

Why among men thou like a god dost show?

Athens honoured him with her citizenship, says Diocles, for having slain the Thracian Cotys. He lived in fraternal piety with his sister, a midwife, so says Eratosthenes in his essay On Wealth and Poverty, now and then even taking things for sale to market, poultry perchance or pigs, and he would dust the things in the house, quite indifferent as to what he did. They say he showed his indifference by washing a porker. Once he got enraged in his sister's cause (her name was Philista), and he told the man who blamed him that it was not over a weak woman that one should display indifference. When a cur rushed at him and terrified him, he answered his critic that it was not easy entirely to strip oneself of human weakness; but one should strive with all one's might against facts, by deeds if possible, and if not, in word.

They say that, when septic salves and surgical and caustic remedies were applied to a wound he had sustained, he did not so much as frown. Timon also portrays his disposition in the full account which he gives of him to Pytho. Philo of Athens, a friend of his, used to say that he was most fond of Democritus, and then of Homer, admiring him and continually repeating the line



As leaves on trees, such is the life of man.



He also admired Homer because he likened men to wasps, flies, and birds, and would quote these verses as well:



Ay, friend, die thou; why thus thy fate deplore?

Patroclus too, thy better, is no more.



and all the passages which dwell on the unstable purpose, vain pursuits, and childish folly of man.

Posidonius, too, relates of him a story of this sort. When his fellow-passengers on board a ship were all unnerved by a storm, he kept calm and confident, pointing to a little pig in the ship that went on eating, and telling them that such was the unperturbed state in which the wise man should keep himself. Numenius alone attributes to him positive tenets. He had pupils of repute, in particular one Eurylochus, who fell short of his professions; for they say that he was once so angry that he seized the spit with the meat on it and chased his cook right into the market-place. Once in Elis he was so hard pressed by his pupils' questions that he stripped and swam across the Alpheus. Now he was, as Timon too says, most hostile to Sophists.

Philo, again, who had a habit of very often talking to himself, is also referred to in the lines:



Yea, him that is far away from men, at leisure to himself,

Philo, who recks not of opinion or of wrangling.



Besides these, Pyrrho's pupils included Hecataeus of Abdera, Timon of Phlius, author of the Silli, of whom more anon, and also Nausiphanes of Teos, said by some to have been a teacher of Epicurus. All these were called Pyrrhoneans after the name of their master, but Aporetics, Sceptics, Ephectics, and even Zetetics, from their principles, if we may call them such. Zetetics or seekers because they were ever seeking truth, Sceptics or inquirers because they were always looking for a solution and never finding one, Ephectics or doubters because of the state of mind which followed their inquiry, I mean, suspense of judgement, and finally Aporetics or those in perplexity, for not only they but even the dogmatic philosophers themselves in their turn were often perplexed. Pyrrhoneans, of course, they were called from Pyrrho. Theodosius in his Sceptic Chapters denies that Scepticism should be called Pyrrhonism; for if the movement of the mind in either direction is unattainable by us, we shall never know for certain what Pyrrho really intended, and without knowing that, we cannot be called Pyrrhoneans. Besides this (he says), there is the fact that Pyrrho was not the founder of Scepticism; nor had he any positive tenet; but a Pyrrhonean is one who in manners and life resembles Pyrrho.

Some call Homer the founder of this school, for to the same questions he more than anyone else is always giving different answers at different times, and is never definite or dogmatic about the answer. The maxims of the Seven Wise Men, too, they call sceptical; for instance, "Observe the Golden Mean," and "A pledge is a curse at one's elbow," meaning that whoever plights his troth steadfastly and trustfully brings a curse on his own head. Sceptically minded, again, were Archilochus and Euripides, for Archilochus says:



Man's soul, O Glaucus, son of Leptines,

Is but as one short day that Zeus sends down.



And Euripides:



Great God! how can they say poor mortal men

Have minds and think? Hang we not on thy will?

Do we not what it pleaseth thee to wish?



Furthermore, they find Xenophanes, Zeno of Elea, and Democritus to be sceptics: Xenophanes because he says,



Clear truth hath no man seen nor e'er shall know



and Zeno because he would destroy motion, saying, "A moving body moves neither where it is nor where it is not"; Democritus because he rejects qualities, saying, "Opinion says hot or cold, but the reality is atoms and empty space," and again, "Of a truth we know nothing, for truth is in a well." Plato, too, leaves the truth to gods and sons of gods, and seeks after the probable explanation. Euripides says:



Who knoweth if to die be but to live,

And that called life by mortals be but death?



So too Empedocles:



So to these mortal may not list nor look

Nor yet conceive them in his mind



and before that:



Each believes naught but his experience.



And even Heraclitus: "Let us not conjecture on deepest questions what is likely."



Then again Hippocrates showed himself two-sided and but human. And before them all Homer:



Pliant is the tongue of mortals; numberless the tales within it;



And



Ample is of words the pasture, hither thither widely ranging;



and



And the saying which thou sayest, back it cometh later on thee,

where he is speaking of the equal value of contradictory sayings.



The Sceptics, then, were constantly engaged in overthrowing the dogmas of all schools, but enuntiated none themselves; and though they would go so far as to bring forward and expound the dogmas of the others, they themselves laid down nothing definitely, not even the laying down of nothing. So much so that they even refuted their laying down of nothing, saying, for instance, "We determine nothing," since otherwise they would have been betrayed into determining; but we put forward, say they, all the theories for the purpose of indicating our unprecipitate attitude, precisely as we might have done if we had actually assented to them. Thus by the expression "We determine nothing" is indicated their state of even balance; which is similarly indicated by the other expressions, "Not more (one thing than another),"

"Every saying has its corresponding opposite," and the like. But "Not more (one thing than another)" can also be taken positively, indicating that two things are alike; for example, "The pirate is no more wicked than the liar." But the Sceptics meant it not positively but negatively, as when, in refuting an argument, one says, "Neither had more existence, Scylla or the Chimaera." And "More so" itself is sometimes comparative, as when we say that "Honey is more sweet than grapes"; sometimes both positive and negative, as when we say, "Virtue profits more than it harms," for in this phrase we indicate that virtue profits and does not harm.

But the Sceptics even refute the statement "Not more (one thing than another)." For, as forethought is no more existent than non-existent, so "Not more (one thing than another)" is no more existent than not. Thus, as Timon says in the Pytho, the statement means just absence of all determination and withholding of assent. The other statement, "Every saying, etc.,"equally compels suspension of judgement; when facts disagree, but the contradictory statements have exactly the same weight, ignorance of the truth is the necessary consequence. But even this statement has its corresponding antithesis, so that after destroying others it turns round and destroys itself, like a purge which drives the substance out and then in its turn is itself eliminated and destroyed.

This the dogmatists answer by saying that they do [not merely] not deny the statement, but even plainly assert it. So they were merely using the words as servants, as it was not possible not to refute one statement by another; just as we are accustomed to say there is no such thing as space, and yet we have no alternative but to speak of space for the purpose of argument, though not of positive doctrine, and just as we say nothing comes about by necessity and yet have to speak of necessity. This was the sort of interpretation they used to give; though things appear to be such and such, they are not such in reality but only appear such. And they would say that they sought, not thoughts, since thoughts are evidently thought, but the things in which sensation plays a part.

Thus the Pyrrhonean principle, as Aenesidemus says in the introduction to his Pyrrhonics, is but a report on phenomena or on any kind of judgement, a report in which all things are brought to bear on one another, and in the comparison are found to present much anomaly and confusion. As to the contradictions in their doubts, they would first show the ways in which things gain credence, and then by the same methods they would destroy belief in them; for they say those things gain credence which either the senses are agreed upon or which never or at least rarely change, as well as things which become habitual or are determined by law and those which please or excite wonder. They showed, then, on the basis of that which is contrary to what induces belief, that the probabilities on both sides are equal. Perplexities arise from the agreements between appearances or judgements, and these perplexities they distinguished under ten different modes in which the subjects in question appeared to vary. The following are the ten modes laid down.

The first mode relates to the differences between living creatures in respect of those things which give them pleasure or pain, or are useful or harmful to them. By this it is inferred that they do not receive the same impressions from the same things, with the result that such a conflict necessarily leads to suspension of judgement. For some creatures multiply without intercourse, for example, creatures that live in fire, the Arabian phoenix and worms; others by union, such as man and the rest. Some are distinguished in one way, some in another, and for this reason they differ in their senses also, hawks for instance being most keen-sighted, and dogs having a most acute sense of smell. It is natural that if the senses, e.g. eyes, of animals differ, so also will the impressions produced upon them; so to the goat vine-shoots are good to eat, to man they are bitter; the quail thrives on hemlock, which is fatal to man; the pig will eat ordure, the horse will not.

The second mode has reference to the natures and idiosyncrasies of men; for instance, Demophon, Alexander's butler, used to get warm in the shade and shiver in the sun. Andron of Argos is reported by Aristotle to have travelled across the waterless deserts of Libya without drinking. Moreover, one man fancies the profession of medicine, another farming, and another commerce; and the same ways of life are injurious to one man but beneficial to another; from which it follows that judgement must be suspended.

The third mode depends on the differences between the sense-channels in different cases, for an apple gives the impression of being pale yellow in colour to the sight, sweet in taste and fragrant in smell. An object of the same shape is made to appear different by differences in the mirrors reflecting it. Thus it follows that what appears is no more such and such a thing than something different.

The fourth mode is that due to differences of condition and to changes in general; for instance, health, illness, sleep, waking, joy, sorrow, youth, old age, courage, fear, want, fullness, hate, love, heat, cold, to say nothing of breathing freely and having the passages obstructed. The impressions received thus appear to vary according to the nature of the conditions. Nay, even the state of madmen is not contrary to nature; for why should their state be so more than ours? Even to our view the sun has the appearance of standing still. And Theon of Tithorea used to go to bed and walk in his sleep, while Pericles' slave did the same on the housetop.

The fifth mode is derived from customs, laws, belief in myths, compacts between nations and dogmatic assumptions. This class includes considerations with regard to things beautiful and ugly, true and false, good and bad, with regard to the gods, and with regard to the coming into being and the passing away of the world of phenomena. Obviously the same thing is regarded by some as just and by others as unjust, or as good by some and bad by others. Persians think it not unnatural for a man to marry his daughter; to Greeks it is unlawful. The Massagetae, acording to Eudoxus in the first book of his Voyage round the World, have their wives in common; the Greeks have not. The Cilicians used to delight in piracy; not so the Greeks. Different people believe in different gods; some in providence, others not. In burying their dead, the Egyptians embalm them; the Romans burn them; the Paeonians throw them into lakes. As to what is true, then, let suspension of judgement be our practice.

The sixth mode relates to mixtures and participations, by virtue of which nothing appears pure in and by itself, but only in combination with air, light, moisture, solidity, heat, cold, movement, exhalations and other forces. For purple shows different tints in sunlight, moonlight, and lamplight; and our own complexion does not appear the same at noon and when the sun is low. Again, a rock which in air takes two men to lift is easily moved about in water, either because, being in reality heavy, it is lifted by the water or because, being light, it is made heavy by the air. Of its own inherent property we know nothing, any more than of the constituent oils in an ointment.

The seventh mode has reference to distances, positions, places and the occupants of the places. In this mode things which are thought to be large appear small, square things round; flat things appear to have projections, straight things to be bent, and colourless coloured. So the sun, on account of its distance, appears small, mountains when far away appear misty and smooth, but when near at hand rugged. Furthermore, the sun at its rising has a certain appearance, but has a dissimilar appearance when in mid-heaven, and the same body one appearance in a wood and another in open country. The image again varies according to the position of the object, and a dove's neck according to the way it is turned. Since, then, it is not possible to observe these things apart from places and positions, their real nature is unknowable.

The eighth mode is concerned with quantities and qualities of things, say heat or cold, swiftness or slowness, colourlessness or variety of colours. Thus wine taken in moderation strengthens the body, but too much of it is weakening; and so with food and other things.

The ninth mode has to do with perpetuity, strangeness, or rarity. Thus earthquakes are no surprise to those among whom they constantly take place; nor is the sun, for it is seen every day. This ninth mode is put eighth by Favorinus and tenth by Sextus and Aenesidemus; moreover the tenth is put eighth by Sextus and ninth by Favorinus.

The tenth mode rests on inter-relation, e.g. between light and heavy, strong and weak, greater and less, up and down. Thus that which is on the right is not so by nature, but is so understood in virtue of its position with respect to something else; for, if that change its position, the thing is no longer on the right. Similarly father and brother are relative terms, day is relative to the sun, and all things relative to our mind. Thus relative terms are in and by themselves unknowable. These, then, are the ten modes of perplexity.

But Agrippa and his school add to them five other modes, resulting respectively from disagreement, extension ad infinitum, relativity, hypothesis and reciprocal inference. The mode arising from disagreement proves, with regard to any inquiry whether in philosophy or in everyday life, that it is full of the utmost contentiousness and confusion. The mode which involves extension ad infinitum refuses to admit that what is sought to be proved is firmly established, because one thing furnishes the ground for belief in another, and so on ad infinitum. The mode derived from relativity declares that a thing can never be apprehended in and by itself, but only in connexion with something else. Hence all things are unknowable. The mode resulting from hypothesis arises when people suppose that you must take the most elementary of things as of themselves entitled to credence, instead of postulating them: which is useless, because some one else will adopt the contrary hypothesis. The mode arising from reciprocal inference is found whenever that which should be confirmatory of the thing requiring to be proved itself has to borrow credit from the latter, as, for example, if anyone seeking to establish the existence of pores on the ground that emanations take place should take this (the existence of pores) as proof that there are emanations.

They would deny all demonstration, criterion, sign, cause, motion, the process of learning, coming into being, or that there is anything good or bad by nature. For all demonstration, say they, is constructed out of things either already proved or indemonstrable. If out of things already proved, those things too will require some demonstration, and so on ad infinitum; if out of things indemonstrable, then, whether all or some or only a single one of the steps are the subject of doubt, the whole is indemonstrable. If you think, they add, that there are some things which need no demonstration, yours must be a rare intellect, not to see that you must first have demonstration of the very fact that the things you refer to carry conviction in themselves. Nor must we prove that the elements are four from the fact that the elements are four. Besides, if we discredit particular demonstrations, we cannot accept the generalization from them. And in order that we may know that an argument constitutes a demonstration, we require a criterion; but again, in order that we may know that it is a criterion we require a demonstration; hence both the one and the other are incomprehensible, since each is referred to the other. How then are we to grasp the things which are uncertain, seeing that we know no demonstration? For what we wish to ascertain is not whether things appear to be such and such, but whether they are so in their essence.

They declared the dogmatic philosophers to be fools, observing that what is concluded ex hypothesi is properly described not as inquiry but assumption, and by reasoning of this kind one may even argue for impossibilities. As for those who think that we should not judge of truth from surrounding circumstances or legislate on the basis of what is found in nature, these men, they used to say, made themselves the measure of all things, and did not see that every phenomenon appears in a certain disposition and in a certain reciprocal relation to surrounding circumstances. Therefore we must affirm either that all things are true or that all things are false. For if certain things only are true [and others are false], how are we to distinguish them? Not by the senses, where things in the field of sense are in question, since all these things appear to sense to be on an equal footing; nor by the mind, for the same reason. Yet apart from these faculties there is no other, so far as we can see, to help us to a judgement. Whoever therefore, they say, would be firmly assured about anything sensible or intelligible must first establish the received opinions about it; for some have refuted one doctrine, others another. But things must be judged either by the sensible or by the intelligible, and both are disputed. Therefore it is impossible to pronounce judgement on opinions about sensibles or intelligibles; and if the conflict in our thoughts compels us to disbelieve every one, the standard or measure, by which it is held that all things are exactly determined, will be destroyed, and we must deem every statement of equal value. Further, say they, our partner in an inquiry into a phenomenon is either to be trusted or not. If he is, he will have nothing to reply to the man to whom it appears to be the opposite; for just as our friend who describes what appears to him is to be trusted, so is his opponent. If he is not to be trusted, he will actually be disbelieved when he describes what appears to him.

We must not assume that what convinces us is actually true. For the same thing does not convince every one, nor even the same people always. Persuasiveness sometimes depends on external circumstances, on the reputation of the speaker, on his ability as a thinker or his artfulness, on the familiarity or the pleasantness of the topic.

Again, they would destroy the criterion by reasoning of this kind. Even the criterion has either been critically determined or not. If it has not, it is definitely untrustworthy, and in its purpose of distinguishing is no more true than false. If it has, it will belong to the class of particular judgements, so that one and the same thing determines and is determined, and the criterion which has determined will have to be determined by another, that other by another, and so on ad infinitum. In addition to this there is disagreement as to the criterion, some holding that man is the criterion, while for some it is the senses, for others reason, for others the apprehensive presentation. Now man disagrees with man and with himself, as is shown by differences of laws and customs. The senses deceive, and reason says different things. Finally, the apprehensive presentation is judged by the mind, and the mind itself changes in various ways. Hence the criterion is unknowable, and consequently truth also.

They deny, too, that there is such a thing as a sign. If there is, they say, it must either be sensible or intelligible. Now it is not sensible, because what is sensible is a common attribute, whereas a sign is a particular thing. Again, the sensible is one of the things which exist by way of difference, while the sign belongs to the category of relative. Nor is a sign an object of thought, for objects of thought are of four kinds, apparent judgements on things apparent, non-apparent judgements on things non-apparent, non-apparent on apparent, or apparent on non-apparent; and a sign is none of these, so that there is no such thing as a sign. A sign is not "apparent on apparent," for what is apparent needs no sign; nor is it non-apparent on non-apparent, for what is revealed by something must needs appear; nor is it non-apparent on apparent, for that which is to afford the means of apprehending something else must itself be apparent; nor, lastly, is it apparent on non-apparent, because the sign, being relative, must be apprehended along with that of which it is the sign, which is not here the case. It follows that nothing uncertain can be apprehended; for it is through signs that uncertain things are said to be apprehended.

Causes, too, they destroy in this way. A cause is something relative; for it is relative to what can be caused, namely, the effect. But things which are relative are merely objects of thought and have no substantial existence. Therefore a cause can only be an object of thought; inasmuch as, if it be a cause, it must bring with it that of which it is said to be the cause, otherwise it will not be a cause. Just as a father, in the absence of that in relation to which he is called father, will not be a father, so too with a cause. But that in relation to which the cause is thought of, namely the effect, is not present; for there is no coming into being or passing away or any other process: therefore there is no such thing as cause. Furthermore, if there is a cause, either bodies are the cause of bodies, or things incorporeal of things incorporeal; but neither is the case; therefore there is no such thing as cause. Body in fact could not be the cause of body, inasmuch as both have the same nature. And if either is called a cause in so far as it is a body, the other, being a body, will become a cause. But if both be alike causes, there will be nothing to be acted upon Nor can an incorporeal thing be the cause of an incorporeal thing, for the same reason. And a thing incorporeal cannot be the cause of a body, since nothing incorporeal creates anything corporeal. And, lastly, a body cannot be the cause of anything incorporeal, because what is produced must be of the material operated upon; but if it is not operated upon because it is incorporeal, it cannot be produced by anything whatever. Therefore there is no such thing as a cause. A corollary to this is their statement that the first principles of the universe have no real existence; for in that case something must have been there to create and act.

Furthermore there is no motion; for that which moves moves either in the place where it is or in a place where it is not. But it cannot move in the place where it is, still less in any place where it is not. Therefore there is no such thing as motion.

They used also to deny the possibility of learning. If anything is taught, they say, either the existent is taught through its existence or the non-existent through its non-existence. But the existent is not taught through its existence, for the nature of existing things is apparent to and recognized by all; nor is the non-existent taught through the nonexistent, for with the non-existent nothing is ever done, so that it cannot be taught to anyone.

Nor, say they, is there any coming into being. For that which is does not come into being, since it is; nor yet that which is not, for it has no substantial existence, and that which is neither substantial nor existent cannot have had the chance of coming into being either.

There is nothing good or bad by nature, for if there is anything good or bad by nature, it must be good or bad for all persons alike, just as snow is cold to all. But there is no good or bad which is such to all persons in common; therefore there is no such thing as good or bad by nature. For either all that is thought good by anyone whatever must be called good, or not all. Certainly all cannot be so called; since one and the same thing is thought good by one person and bad by another; for instance, Epicurus thought pleasure good and Antisthenes thought it bad; thus on our supposition it will follow that the same thing is both good and bad. But if we say that not all that anyone thinks good is good, we shall have to judge the different opinions; and this is impossible because of the equal validity of opposing arguments. Therefore the good by nature is unknowable.

The whole of their mode of inference can be gathered from their extant treatises. Pyrrho himself, indeed, left no writings, but his associates Timon, Aenesidemus, Numenius and Nausiphanes did; and others as well.

The dogmatists answer them by declaring that the Sceptics themselves do apprehend and dogmatize; for when they are thought to be refuting their hardest they do apprehend, for at the very same time they are asseverating and dogmatizing. Thus even when they declare that they determine nothing, and that to every argument there is an opposite argument, they are actually determining these very points and dogmatizing. The others reply, "We confess to human weaknesses; for we recognize that it is day and that we are alive, and many other apparent facts in life; but with regard to the things about which our opponents argue so positively, claiming to have definitely apprehended them, we suspend our judgement because they are not certain, and confine knowledge to our impressions. For we admit that we see, and we recognize that we think this or that, but how we see or how we think we know not. And we say in conversation that a certain thing appears white, but we are not positive that it really is white. As to our 'We determine nothing' and the like, we use the expressions in an undogmatic sense, for they are not like the assertion that the world is spherical. Indeed the latter statement is not certain, but the others are mere admissions. Thus in saying 'We determine nothing,' we are not determining even that."

Again, the dogmatic philosophers maintain that the Sceptics do away with life itself, in that they reject all that life consists in. The others say this is false, for they do not deny that we see; they only say that they do not know how we see. "We admit the apparent fact," say they, "without admitting that it really is what it appears to be." We also perceive that fire burns; as to whether it is its nature to burn, we suspend our judgement. We see that a man moves, and that he perishes; how it happens we do not know. We merely object to accepting the unknown substance behind phenomena. When we say a picture has projections, we are describing what is apparent; but if we say that it has no projections, we are then speaking, not of what is apparent, but of something else. This is what makes Timon say in his Python that he has not gone outside what is customary. And again in the Conceits he says:



But the apparent is omnipotent wherever it goes;



and in his work On the Senses, "I do not lay it down that honey is sweet, but I admit that it appears to be so."

Aenesidemus too in the first book of his Pyrrhonean Discourses says that Pyrrho determines nothing dogmatically, because of the possibility of contradiction, but guides himself by apparent facts. Aenesidemus says the same in his works Against Wisdom and On Inquiry. Furthermore Zeuxis, the friend of Aenesidemus, in his work On Two-sided Arguments, Antiochus of Laodicea, and Apellas in his Agrippa all hold to phenomena alone. Therefore the apparent is the Sceptic's criterion, as indeed Aenesidemus says; and so does Epicurus. Democritus, however, denied that any apparent fact could be a criterion, indeed he denied the very existence of the apparent. Against this criterion of appearances the dogmatic philosophers urge that, when the same appearances produce in us different impressions, e.g. a round or square tower, the Sceptic, unless he gives the preference to one or other, will be unable to take any course; if on the other hand, say they, he follows either view, he is then no longer allowing equal value to all apparent facts. The Sceptics reply that, when different impressions are produced, they must both be said to appear; for things which are apparent are so called because they appear. The end to be realized they hold to be suspension of judgement, which brings with it tranquillity like its shadow: so Timon and Aenesidemus declare.

For in matters which are for us to decide we shall neither choose this nor shrink from that; and things which are not for us to decide but happen of necessity, such as hunger, thirst and pain, we cannot escape, for they are not to be removed by force of reason. And when the dogmatists argue that he may thus live in such a frame of mind that he would not shrink from killing and eating his own father if ordered to do so, the Sceptic replies that he will be able so to live as to suspend his judgement in cases where it is a question of arriving at the truth, but not in matters of life and the taking of precautions. Accordingly we may choose a thing or shrink from a thing by habit and may observe rules and customs. According to some authorities the end proposed by the Sceptics is insensibility; according to others, gentleness.





THE GREEK SCEPTICS:


FROM PYRRHO TO SEXTUS


By


Norman Maccoll





PYRRHO AND TIMON





Pyrrho, the son of Pleistarchus, or, according to Pausanias of Pistocrates, was born at Elis. Very few particulars of his life have come down to us, and those few we owe chiefly to the compilation of Diogenes Laertius. Of humble origin, he is said to have been originally a painter, and a picture of some torch-bearers attributed to him was preserved in the gymnasium of his native place. He studied philosophy under the Democritean Anaxarchus; and it would seem that Democritus was his favourite among the thinkers who preceded him: the story of his having been a pupil of Bryson the son of Stilpon must, as Zeller' has pointed out, be rejected as chronologically impossible. With Anaxarchus he travelled as far as India in the train of Alexander the Great. On his return to Greece he settled in Elis, and lived there in honourable poverty with his sister Philistia, a midwife. His fellow-citizens gave him a priesthood, and on his account exempted all philosophers from taxation. He died at the age of ninety, somewhere probably between 275 B. C. and 270 B. C.

Pausanias saw his likeness in a porch by the agora, and a monument to his memory, which lay outside the city. His chief disciples were Hecataeus of Abdera, Timon of Phlius, and Nausiphanes of Teos, whom a doubtful report makes the teacher of Epicurus.

Such was the uneventful life of the man who has been generally regarded as the father of Scepticism. The name of Pyrrhonean will always adhere to the school: yet even in antiquity the position of Pyrrho was not undisputed, and that more particularly by the Sceptics themselves. They were anxious to claim for their views an earlier origin, and in consequence we find Theodosius of Tripolis expressly declaring that Pyrrho had no particular view of any kind, far less the right to give his name to the school, and Sextus Empiricus opens his Hypotheses with a long list of those who were Pyrrhoneans before Pyrrho. At first sight such objections may be regarded as valid; but I believe that, in this case at least, general tradition has not been in error.

Few words have suffered more from the license of usage than Scepticism. It is indeed used so frequently as if it were coextensive with doubt, that it is now too late to hope it will ever be reclaimed and more accurately applied. Yet it is but a portion of doubt. In the history of philosophy doubt appears when Philosophy has separated itself from Theology, and so begun to be. Still that is not scepticism, and still less can the name be given to that wider form of doubt that first breaks in upon and destroys the undisputed supremacy of belief—a supremacy that once contested can never regain its old absolutism.

This general mistrust or doubt gains in definiteness, as it becomes more confined to a special object, and three branches may be singled out, as at any rate the most important: doubt applied to a body of facts or statements, doubt applied to the supernatural, and doubt applied to a subject that embraces all others— philosophy as the science of the Necessary.

Taking the last as an example, we have, succeeding to the vague questionings, which are the first promptings to reflection, the more pronounced doubt which is provoked by a formed system of affirmative conclusions. Then isolated arguments crop up, which are mostly used by one who is merely clearing the ground to make room for a rival dogmatism; but which sometimes spring from a mind that looks with little confidence on dialectic. Lastly, the scattered objections are gathered up, and fashioned into a united array of argument: the doubtful neutrality or fitful raid gives place to regular warfare, and scepticism exists in the true sense of the word. The other divisions of doubt are both affirmative in their results. Rationalism tends to eliminate the supernatural, but at the same time to maintain the phenomena. The facts are still asserted, but with a new interpretation, and usually the value attached to them is different. Criticism endeavours to sift the false from the true, and by the very act of so doing it assumes that the true exists, an assertion which scepticism would not deny, and that moreover the true is accessible to us, an assertion which scepticism would dispute. Criticism can go further than scepticism. Antinomies have long been a cherished weapon of the sceptic, but they were, he believed, insoluble. When the critical method was at last applied to philosophy, Kant carefully formed the Antinomies; but he also solved them. For the sake of clearness these three kinds of doubt may be enumerated, and rationalism and criticism, the two, which lead to positive results, distinguished from scepticism; but practice and advantage alike forbid us to lay any great stress on the distinction. Scepticism, for instance, can hardly come into being without some antecedent criticism, and we often find the whole three prevailing simultaneously, and professed by the very same thinker.

Scepticism, as a formulated system strictly opposed to dogmatism, really belongs to a comparatively late period in the history of philosophy—a fact in itself nearly enough to show how unfounded after all is Bayle’s remark, that scepticism is easy. Nor is most of the abuse commonly lavished upon it much more deserved, for it no more springs from the evil side of man's nature than dogmatism does. Its great vice is not its origin but its one-sidedness. It is inevitably one-sided, as it renounces part of the field of human knowledge: of its own free will abandons much that is valuable, and, distrusting some of the faculties, with which the mind is gifted, affords it only a partial cultivation. Hence, as Herbart well says, "His thoughts are not come to maturity who persists in dogmatism." While however scepticism is harmful to one who never rises above it, it is of immense value to every beginning of inquiry, and its services in this respect have been recognized by all great thinkers, by none more than by Aristotle. The Nemesis of dogmatism, it is yet essential to the dogmatist, and of itself can hardly be said to have an indispensable existence. It is not a thing to be invented by any one man: it naturally rises up by the side of the systems it combats. From them it derives form and colour: changes as they change; grows as they grow; decays as they decay. It uses their arguments, borrows their methods, and adopts as it pleases their premises or their conclusions.

The foregoing remarks appear to be borne out in Greek history. Zeno of Elea and Heracleitus are among the earliest of those to whom the name of Sceptic has been applied with some show of plausibility, yet, when we come to sift such accounts, as have been handed down to us, we see that Heracleitus denied all permanent Existence, only that he might affirm the principle of Becoming, and that Zeno, while he argued against Motion, asserted the doctrine of pure simple Being. The same remark applies to Xenophanes and Parmenides. Each was in reality a dogmatist, and sceptical only to the overthrow of what opposed his own speculations, and, though they greatly promoted scepticism, they promoted it unconsciously. But the generation which followed, a generation which delighted to call in question all that tradition and custom had combined to hallow, was not neglectful of the powerful aid, which the Eleatic and Heracleitean reasonings could lend to its general assault upon all objective truth. Zeno had shown Motion to be a dream: Heracleitus had shown Being to be a fiction. No wonder they were useful allies. The object of the Sophists was destruction, and they welcomed all that might help them to destroy, and passed by all that might help them to construct.



How then, it may be asked, did the Sophists differ from the Pyrrhoneans?



They were alike anxious to subvert, and alike hostile to the dogmatic systems of their times: nay from one point of view the Sophists are the stricter sceptics of the two. The Pyrrhoneans propose a practical end; they are sceptical not from love of truth, but from love of happiness: but the Sophists had no such end in sight. Whatever the failings and fallacies of particular teachers, the characteristic note of the school at large is a restless thirst for progress and for knowledge, a daring wish to subdue all things to the individual reason. Nor is it enough to answer that the Sophists are after all not really philosophers, that they formed no system, that their theories and doctrines are obvious and trivial, for however much such accusations may tell against the majority of the Sophists, they can hardly be considered to affect Gorgias or Protagoras. The real ground of difference lies in the systems they severally attacked. In the Pre-Socratic period Dogmatism was based entirely on the objective, that is to say, objective realities were the sole recognized source of knowledge. When the Sophists confounded their opponents by the aid of the principle of subjectivity, they were doing, what Sceptics always have done, using one positive principle to overthrow another, but then (what true Sceptics do not do) they accepted as true the principle which had been their instrument.

They used it sceptically, but enounced it dogmatically, and, although what they built up seemed at the time trifling in comparison with what they had pulled down, their positive doctrines became in the hands of Socrates a portion of a dogmatic system, and more especially inspired the philosophies which the New Academy assailed. Between the age of the Sophists and of Pyrrho, Dogmatism advanced greatly towards consistency and completeness, and almost by a natural law Scepticism shared the advance. It not only benefited by the differences that arose among the Dogmatists themselves and by the fruitless ingenuity of the Megareans, but it became consistent and complete, for it ceased to be sceptic on the one side, dogmatist on the other; it disputed the possibility of subjective, as much as of objective, truth; and so wide was its range, that, had it not been regarded only as a speculative means to a practical end, a philosophy that taught the great secret of how to be happy, Pyrrhonism would have been very closely akin to the doubt of modern times. One cause at any rate was conspicuous at its birth, which has been common to Scepticism in its rudest and most perfect forms, that feeling of despair which comes over the minds of those who have witnessed the failure of a great effort in philosophy; for then ensues deep distrust of the faculties, which have dared so much, and to all seeming achieved so little.

"We rest our faculties. And thus address the gods: 'True Science if there is. It stays in your abodes; Man's measure cannot mete the immeasurable All.'"

The depression was great, when the cosmologies had to be abandoned: it was still greater, when the speculations of Plato and Aristotle ceased to be satisfactory. It is clear from the tenor both of his life and of his doctrines, that Pyrrho despaired of philosophy, and was content to despair. M. Saisset has compared his early wanderings with those of Descartes; but the parallel cannot be extended further: Pyrrho returned from Asia with the conviction that truth was as yet not attained and perhaps unattainable: Descartes lived to vanquish the scepticism of Charron, and found modern philosophy. Talking of his life at Elis, Mr. Lewes has drawn a brilliant parallel between Socrates and Pyrrho and marked the superiority of the former in his life and in his death, but he has forgotten that, if Socrates is a far higher character than Pyrrho, the Greece of the time of Socrates was nobler than the Greece of the time of Pyrrho. Pyrrho did not oppose his age nor rise very greatly above it, and was so much admired, just because he so nearly fulfilled the ideal of his age. His rule of life did not however differ very widely from that of the Stoics or the Epicureans: it was, as has been already remarked, animated by the same motive as theirs, the same desire of escaping from the contact, if one may so phrase it, of the external world. It won, to be sure, the applause of Timon, and the absurd stories that Diogenes Laertius relates, destitute as they probably are of foundation, still serve to show in what light it was regarded by Pyrrho's own generation or by the one immediately succeeding: and yet it may be safely asserted that, were there nothing more novel or individual in Pyrrho and his teaching than an apathy which some have fancied was borrowed from the Indian Gymnosophists, he would not hold a more notable place in the history, of philosophy than Ariston of Chios, with whom Cicero so often couples him. But we cannot accept the judgment of Pyrrho's contemporaries: Pyrrho's real merit lies not in the practical consequences to which his speculations led, but in the manner in which he commenced them, in the conception he formed of the task before him. According to Timon, Pyrrho declared that the philosopher should ask three questions:



1. How are Things constituted?

2. In what relation should we stand to them?

3. What will result to us from our relation to them?



The problem of philosophy is here proposed, as Erdmann has remarked, very nearly in the terms used by Kant; but the words prefixed, which describe the questioner as "he who would be happy," recall us from the great thinker of the 18th century to the contemporary of the Stoics. The answers show in a few words the essential points of Pyrrho's scepticism:



(1) Cognition, whether through the Senses, or the Reason, is not to be trusted, for the former gives us a knowledge not of Things as they are in themselves, but only of phenomena, and the latter rests on conventional association, and not on scientific proof: nor is an attempt to combine sense-knowledge with Reason of any avail. Therefore our sensations and opinions are neither true nor false. Things in themselves lie beyond our sphere, equally indifferent, immeasurable, and undistinguishable.



(2) If the nature of things is beyond our knowledge, we can form no opinion regarding them: we cannot distinguish the false from the true, for both to the senses and the reason all things are alike: they possess no criterion of truth: we must not hazard those decided judgments, in which the dogmatist indulges: we must incline neither to the right hand nor to the left: we must remain unmoved. We cannot assert of the individual object, that it exists or that it does not, for we are conscious only of our sensations: we allow that we see and apprehend the seeing, but we do not know the manner of sight or the manner of apprehension: it is phenomena only that we know. An object appears to us white, but we cannot be sure that the reality corresponds to the appearance. We have no more reason for predicating one attribute rather than another: we cannot affirm an object to be white: we can merely say that to us it appears white. In such circumstances only one position is possible to the philosopher. In such a balance of evidence or rather in such a lack of all decisive evidence he must "refuse his assent" and suspend his judgment—an attitude which the Sceptics have extolled as the highest of human wisdom.



(3) The answer to the third question is a necessary consequence of the answer to the second. We have only to remember that the three problems were supposed to be put before one who was seeking for happiness. The third question then really amounts to this. What effect on our happiness will our attitude to things have? This attitude has already been determined to be suspension of judgment If therefore we are to make a rule of abstaining from all judgments, our happiness must be dependent on this abstinence, and consist in regarding everything external with undisturbed tranquility of mind; for there is no certainty with regard to what is external, and, where there is no certainty, there can be no happiness. The soul must retire upon itself, looking upon all outside itself as indifferent, and striving to become neither the slave nor the mistress of circumstances, but separate from, and independent of, them.



The answer to the third question shows the aim of Pyrrho's doubt: like all his contemporaries he searched for a summum bonum: he was not a sceptic in the modern sense of the word: he doubted because doubt appeared to give him the most secure promise of happiness. On the other hand his scepticism is neither a mere attack on certain systems, an attempt to upset certain premises or certain conclusions, nor does it proclaim the uselessness of Ontology, and confine us to enquiries supposed to be likely to be more fruitful of results: such a theory as Pyrrho's is no one-sided, half-hearted scepticism: its conclusions are sweeping in the extreme: it declares that to us all is unknown and unknowable. In polemic it is particularly formidable as its principles are eminently aggressive, and its method has the somewhat uncommon excellence of being rigidly deduced from them. For one who believes that on every question there is unavoidably a Balance of evidence, that no deciding reason is forthcoming, and that no predicate is more tenable than its contradictory, it is certainly competent to meet every argument by opposing to it its contradictory, as equally valid and reasonable. It is plain how formidable an adversary might prove, who assailed all positions with equal impartiality, and apparently exposed no vulnerable points himself. We shall have abundant proof of this when we come to speak of the New Academy. But, when we consider Pyrrhonism in its results, the verdict cannot be so favourable. On its principles, as Aristocles has pointed out, science of every kind is an impossibility.

Investigation cannot exist, when we are unable to show, why a thing is, rather than is not, why we affirm or deny it, or even to furnish a reason for the " why " itself. And this is true not in metaphysical questions merely, but also in those moral ones, which formed the staple of speculative enquiry among Pyrrho's contemporaries. For, when once the theory was laid down, that all that is external to us is indifferent to us, the numberless questions arising out of the practical applications of moral philosophy were swept away: there was no need of debating, how a man ought to act under such and such circumstances, when any possible course of action can have scarcely any possible effect. Such a position at once separated the Pyrrhonists from the rival Schools, and cut them from what was to the others the field of literary activity. No treatise similar to Grantor's On Grief, and to that of Panaetius On Duty could legitimately proceed from sceptics. But Pyrrho did not only run counter to all the tastes and tendencies of his time, he proposed an ideal that, while it wanted the attractions of Epicureanism, and failed to make that appeal to many of man's noblest feelings, which won Zeno so many converts, was also in the highest degree unnatural. It did indeed meet the popular demand for freedom from the rule of the external, and although Pyrrho's own manner of life was much admired, the indifference he taught was so fettering, aimless, and deadening, as to meet with few imitators.

Pyrrho himself felt the difficulty when he admitted ''It is hard to strip off the man," and the later Sceptics toned down the original doctrine of ataraxia and drawing a distinction between matters of opinion, and matters of necessity, (i. e., those on which they supposed themselves subject to outward influences). As matters of necessity, they reckoned the constitution of the individual man, and the manners and customs of society.

The modification just mentioned I would follow Zeller in considering as the work of the later Sceptics: however to justify the opinion it is needful to examine the question of the authorship of the various doctrines that we find gathered together in the treatises of Sextus Empiricus. In many cases Sextus does not refer to their authors the theories he states: in others his dictum is opposed to that of our other authorities.

On this difficult and disputed subject I feel disposed to propose the two following canons.



(1) That all elaborated formulae of sceptical argument and doctrine are to be ascribed to the later Sceptics.

(2) That the elements of Scepticism are nearly wholly Pyrrho's and not Timon’s.



The first of these canons has in its favour that it asserts a process of development; common to most systems, and which is seen very distinctly exemplified in the New Academy and the Porch: indeed, when we remember how comparatively rude and superficial a doctrine Stoicism was, as promulgated by Zeno, and how small a length even Arcesilas carried the movement he set on foot, it is not apparently a very violent hypothesis, that Pyrrho only sketched the broad outlines of the philosophy which bears his name. Even the view, which I have endeavoured to disprove, and which was held by some of the ancients, that Pyrrho was not the founder of the Sceptical school, tends to show that he could not have been the author of a very complex body of speculations. It is nearly certain that he wrote nothing except a poem addressed to Alexander, and a thinker, who thus neglected the ordinary means of spreading his opinion, and in this respect at any rate presents a strong contrast to the majority of the Post-Socratic teachers, who were, as a rule, somewhat voluminous authors can hardly be supposed to have done more than trace the outlines for others to fill up. Instruction that is wholly oral can never be very intricate in its nature. Nor again is it likely that one who by all accounts lived a retired life and purposely settled at Elis, far away from intellectual controversies, could have engaged in the lengthy controversy with all known schools and sciences (particularly the polemic against Logic) which fills the eleven books of Sextus Empiricus against the Mathematicians. Indeed that he should have attacked the Stoics or Epicureans at all, is on chronological grounds extremely doubtful.

Pyrrho was settled at Elis shortly after B. C. 323, and Zeno did not in all probability begin to teach much before B. C. 300, while Epicurus only opened his school at Athens in B. C. 306, and some years should be reckoned, as having elapsed, before Pyrrho could have gained familiarity with their doctrines. In fact we have no proof that he ever heard of them. Another argument for the canon is that, if we go carefully through Sextus Empiricus, and the abstract of the lost work of Enesidemus which Photius has preserved for us in his Muriobiblion besides being struck by the amount that has been borrowed from the New Academy, and from Carneades in particular, we are astonished to find how little there is that is even referred to Pyrrho. The polemic on Causality belongs to Enesidemus, so do the famous ten Tropes: the reduction to five was made by Agrippa, and they bear traces of a later phase of thought and doctrine than that of Pyrrho's day though even they were occasionally called Pyrrhonean.

It is more difficult to show plausible reasons for the second canon: it rests greatly on the light in which we regard Timon, the only one of Pyrrho's pupils who is of any importance to the historian of philosophy. Timon, the son of Timarchus, was born at Phlius somewhere between 325 and 315 according to Zeller. Originally a dancer, he was at one time a pupil of Stilpon, but admiration for Pyrrho drew him to Elis, where he lived some time with his wife, and where his children were born. Driven from this seclusion, by straitened circumstances it is alleged, he wandered about the Aegean Sea, the Hellespont and Propontis, and perhaps most of the Western Coast of Asia, and became known both to Antigonus and to Ptolemy Philadelphus, for the kings of the new monarchies had already become patrons of literature. Settling finally at Chalcedon he gained a high reputation as a Sophist, but, when he had earned a considerable fortune by his profession, he removed to Athens, and, with the exception of a brief sojourn at Thebes, he dwelled there till his death.

His works were numerous, and it was doubtless through him that Pyrrho's doctrine became first generally known; but, apart from the consideration, that, if we assign the foundations, so to speak, of Pyrrhonism to Pyrrho and its further developments to the later Sceptics, there is little left to attribute to Timon, there is much reason to doubt the thoroughness of his discipleship. Pyrrhonism is in harmony with what we know of Pyrrho's life, greatly at variance with what we know of Timon's. General disbelief may have been congenial to a general railer; but what trace of ataraxia did he display?

Proud, restless, bitter, physically deformed, and perhaps sensitive to his deformity, he tried every variety of poetry, and found himself most at home in parody and satire. In his most celebrated work, his Silli, he filled one book of narrative verse and two of imaginary dialogue with lampoons on all dogmatic philosophers, personality was apparently his favourite weapon. Aristotle is accused of thoughtlessness, Euclid of wrangling, Zeno of intolerance; Pyrrho alone he reverenced partly for his tranquil life, partly for his skill in argument.

"No one," he declares, "could contend with Pyrrho," but for any additions to Pyrrho's teaching we should hardly look to Timon. What Pyrrho did, can be told in a few words, and at first sight may seem but a small achievement: "he raised doubt to the rank of a method." It is probable that Pyrrho himself started from that portion of his theory which relates to practice, from the third and not from the first question: but however that may be, the more we consider his three questions the more we see their importance. They relate of course to the old points: "Is knowledge absolutely relative? Is there any objective truth? Can we have any knowledge of Things as they are in themselves?" but now for the first time do we find doubt possessed of a regular form. We have however Pyrrho's method alone before us: no notice of his application of it has come down to us: we do not know how he used it against the Ideas of Plato or Aristotle's conception of Matter: we first find it employed by Arcesilas against the Stoics. In Pyrrho's Scepticism and that of the New Academy is comprised almost all the Scepticism that Greece produced. I shall now proceed to trace the history of the latter. A knowledge of what it did and a slight discussion of what those taught, who under the Roman empire professed to revive Scepticism, will enable us to contrast Pyrrhonism and the Academy. More particularly shall we be able to compare the whole doctrine of the latter as exhibited by Carneades and Cleitomachus with the whole doctrine of the former in its last and fullest development. Such a contrast ought also to throw light on the dogmas assailed as well as on the doubters who were the assailants.





THE NEW ACADEMY





Arcesilas the son of Seuthes or Scythes was born at Pitane about B.C. 315. He learned mathematics from his countryman Autolycus, and, when Autolycus left Pitane for Sardis, Arcesilas was his companion. Afterwards his elder brother and guardian Moireas sent him to Athens to study rhetoric. He soon, however, turned to philosophy, and, when he had for some time been a pupil of Theophrastus, he passed over to Grantor and the Academy. On the death of Crates (in what year is not known), he succeeded to the headship of the school. It was a critical moment in its history. The Platonists were Platonists in very little but in name. Speusippus and Xenocrates had, it is true, greatly altered the doctrines of their master: but they had at any rate preserved the wide domain he had originally won for philosophy; and they were themselves men of much metaphysical ability. After their death the Academy yielded to the tendencies of the time; ontology was abandoned, and ethics formed the only portion of philosophy to which much attention was directed. The Academy ceased to have a definite doctrine, and its leaders, sometimes approaching the asceticism of Zeno, sometimes reverting to a more genial doctrine, made their teaching little more than a reflex of their personal characters.

Consequently Arcesilas became head of a school, which possessed great traditions, yet had lost the power of competing successfully with the youthful vigour of the Stoics and Epicureans, and some change was imperative, if he did not wish to see the Academy fall into oblivion. He had the choice of a vigorous assault on the new system or facing again the old problems of subject and object, form and matter: but it was not a question for much hesitation: the spirit of the age was unfavourable to a new dogmatic philosophy; and the genius of the man pre-eminently adapted to polemic. Handsome in person, eloquent, of speech, witty, and fertile in resources, he had all the gifts necessary for argument, and he would appear to have entered into it with zest.

Naturally Stoicism had to bear the brunt of the attack. It was the most ambitious of the dogmatic systems, and therefore the most vulnerable, and such was the prowess and adroitness of the assailant, that his opponents compared him at one moment to the Empysae, at another to the hydra of the legends. In manners and disposition he was the antithesis of the ascetic Zeno. Courteous, generous, and open-hearted, he was a thorough man of the world; fond of art and literature, he shared the love of luxury, common to his age, and was not too much of a philosopher to disdain altogether the complaisance of a courtier. Zeno has been likened to a Genevese Calvinist: we might compare Arcesilas to a Florentine in the palmy days of the Medici: but the scandal, which would distort these traits into faithlessness, drunkenness and servility, may be safely rejected, as the offspring of that rancour, which too often marked the rivalries of the Athenian schools,—a rancour which sometimes nearly equalled the fierce hatreds' of Corenzio and the Neapolitan painters of the 17th century.

Let us rather believe the testimony of Cleanthes in favour of one, whom Timon satirized when living, but praised when dead. Nor do we need any story of youthful jealousy between Zeno and Arcesilas to enable us to account for their differences in later years. The conflict with Stoicism was unavoidable, for it grew out of the position, and, one may say, necessities of the Academy, yet it was a conflict that Plato might have shared in, for between Plato and an Empiric like Zeno there could have been no terms of peace.

As chief of the sect, which beyond all others enjoyed the prestige of a glorious past, Arcesilas had the wisdom to conceal his innovation under the pretext of reviving the teaching of the founders of the school, and Cicero, in the character of Lucullus, compares him to the Tribunes, who pretended that their factious measures were such as would have met with the sanction of Publicola and Flaminius. He carefully collected sentences from Anaxagoras, Democritus, Parmenides, &c. as well as from Plato and Socrates, which countenanced his distrust of sense-knowledge. For Plato he professed a great reverence, and it is an old idea that he really wished to re-introduce the Platonic philosophy, and that his scepticism was but intended to smooth the way for the positive doctrines that he desired to establish. That an apparently thoroughgoing scepticism is, by some freak in logic, occasionally not incompatible with the acceptance of a dogmatic system is shown by the case of Enesidemus: but, as regards Arcesilas, there is no proof strong enough to overcome the antecedent improbability. For what does the direct evidence consist of.

A report mentioned by Sextus Empiricus and the same story told by Diodes of Cnidos. All that is supposed indirectly to favour the idea can quite as fairly be interpreted to mean that Arcesilas, in spite of the scepticism he introduced into the Academy, still retained the name of Platonist, and this is not only confirmed by the testimony of Numenius the historian of the Academy, but by the evidence of the Pyrrhonists themselves.

The supposition of Tenneman that Arcesilas had never heard of Pyrrho cannot be accepted, but the question of the measure of his indebtedness will be best discussed, when we come to consider the difference between the Academy and the Sceptics.

With Arcesilas commences the New or, as some have called it, the Second Academy, which began that contest with the Stoics, which Numenius compares to the battles of the Trojans and the Greeks. Under the pretext of reviving the Socratic method of questioning, Arcesilas suppressed the lectures, which were the customary mode of teaching at the Academy, and substituted for them a discussion between himself and his hearers on the several topics he introduced. Thus the whole training that he gave appears to have been intended to fit his pupils for controversy, and, as the Stoics before the time of Chrysippus were deficient in readiness and in command of words, he rapidly gained a superiority which Zeno vainly attempted to counterbalance by writing against Plato and affecting to ignore Arcesilas.

Scepticism, says Sextus Empiricus, is at birth like a blank sheet of paper that receives representations made by the direct agency of the object, and all our knowledge is therefore in its origin derived from the senses. From perception springs memory, and from the memory of several similar perceptions — experience, Conclusions, drawn from experience form concepts, which are another source of knowledge: drawn naturally and without the aid of method, they are the general ideas, which the Stoics regard as the natural laws of truth and virtue —drawn methodically and consciously they constitute science, which alone gives irresistible conviction. The representations furnished by the senses are received as knowledge (in contradiction to opinions), only after they have been submitted to the understanding. True impressions are those, which, when thus submitted, are found not merely to be impressions, but to awaken in us an irresistible conviction that they present to us the real. Such a representation is called an intellectual representation; and this intellectual representation is the criterion of truth.

But a criterion of this nature Arcesilas will not accept. At the first glance he cannot admit, as the arbiter of truth and falsehood, a conviction, which belongs as much to the fool as to the wise man. For in the wise man it is knowledge, in the fool opinion, and yet the difference is only nominal! Besides, if we accept the Stoic classification the words involve a contradiction. Apprehension is an act of assent, and assent, according to the Stoics, is an act of the understanding, not of the perception. To their notion, that the strength of the conviction was a guarantee, so to speak, of reality, he replies with the favourite Pyrrhonic argument, maintaining in various ways, that there was no true representation such that a false one could not be equally well formed Having thus, as he supposed, refuted the argument for sense-knowledge, Arcesilas considered himself to have shown the impossibility of all knowledge, apparently not regarding at all the possibility of knowledge through the reason.

The Stoics had laid great stress on the distinction they drew, and which was universally accepted, between knowledge and opinion: the former alone is worthy of the wise man. If then, so Arcesilas put the question, knowledge is impossible, what is left to the wise man? Can he trust himself to mere opinion must he not take refuge in a total suspension of judgment? If his opponents attempted to escape from this conclusion by an appeal to practical life and its necessities, Arcesilas would not allow that the will could not be exerted and that action became an impossibility, if certainty were taken away from us.

There is no real dilemma: between action under the guidance of full and perfect knowledge, which to man is unattainable, and all cessation from action, which to man is impossible, lies a third, the only practicable course. A representation calls the will into play, apart from any consideration of its truth or untruth: Probability is a sufficient guide for the conduct of life. "The man, who suspends his judgment on all matters, will," says Arcesilas, "rule his choices and his refusals, and his actions generally by the probable, and, following that as a criterion, he will fare well. For happiness is won by prudence, and the province of prudence is right action. Now that is rightly done for the doing of which a probable cause can be rendered. He then, who gives heed to the probable, will fare well and be happy."

Thus far we are able to follow Arcesilas: but here on the borders, so to say, of ethical philosophy, our information fails. The few scattered hints, which have been collected from Plutarch and Stobaeus by the skillful industry of Zeller, are insufficient to inform us of the manner in which he criticized the Stoic Ethics, Physics, Theology and Logic, and make us feel how great an evil is the fragmentary state, in which Cicero's Academics have come down to us. I am disposed to believe that, what pass for the arguments of Arcesilas, represents rather the general teaching of the Academy previous to Carneades, that is to say, under Evander and Hegesinus, for it appears to be directed against a more developed form of Stoicism than that of Zeno and Cleanthes. However the data are too few to allow of anything beyond the merest conjecture: we know very little of Lacydes: Evander and Hegesinus are to us mere names, and we are compelled from lack of knowledge to pass on at once to Carneades.

Carneades, the son of Epicomus or Philocomus, was a native of Cyrene, born like Plato, as his admirers were fond of remarking, on the day of the Carneia, a festival of much importance in a Dorian city. While still young, he seems to have gone to Athens, where he became the pupil, and in course of time the successor of Hegesinus. But his chief instructors were the Stoics he combated. He studied Dialectic under Diogenes of Babylon, and he pored over the works of Chrysippus, to whom indeed he felt so deeply indebted. When he became head of the Academy, he soon restored its reputation which had decayed after the death of Arcesilas, and such was the charm he exercised that some of his rivals quitted their own schools to go and listen to his lectures. He took part with his former teacher Diogenes, and Critolais the Peripatetic in the well-known embassy, which the Athenians sent to Rome to deprecate the heavy fine imposed upon them for their treatment of their old possession Oropus. It is hardly necessary to repeat the tale, how Carneades on the one day gained the approval even of Cato the Censor by his eloquent declamation in praise of Justice, and how on the next he shocked him by refuting his former argument. It is a story that reads more like a page out of the life of Gorgias in the 5th century than of Carneades in the 2nd. Latterly subject to many infirmities which he is said to have borne with impatience, he expired in B.C. 129.

In opinions he was the true representative of Arcesilas, in subtlety and width of view he surpassed him as he probably surpassed all philosophers who came between Aristotle and Philo. At the same time it should be borne in mind that he only trod in the path first shown by Arcesilas, and that if his philosophy is much in advance of his predecessor's, the advance was, as he himself allowed, greatly owing to the immense improvements that the Stoic philosophy had received at the hands of Chrysippus. Chrysippus had refined the materialism of Zeno, deepening and ennobling both his ethics and Metaphysics, and the arguments of the Academy required a corresponding reform to be enabled to meet Stoicism in its new guise. But Carneades was not satisfied with a mere critique of one dogmatic system;

Scepticism with him has a wider range and a higher aim, and in this point he rose as much above Arcesilas, as he probably fell below him in that winning address and grace of manner and speech, which we know of only by tradition, and which are utterly lost in the meagre outline of his theories, which is all that has survived. Carneades, absorbed in his own thoughts, shunned society, disregarded his personal appearance, and seemed unconscious of what was passing in the world about him. Yet such was his energy and eloquence, aided by a very powerful voice, that he was the most impressive orator of his age. Like Arcesilas and Pyrrho he wrote nothing, but in Cleitomachus he had a disciple fully able and willing not to let his name perish.

In detailing the philosophy of Carneades it will be convenient to divide it into two parts (A) Destructive (against the Dogmatists), (B) Constructive.



(A) The Destructive relates principally to:



(1) The theory of Cognition.

(2) Ethics.

(3) Theology and Teleology.



(B) The Constructive relates to:



(1) The theory of Probability.

(2) Ethics.

(3) Theology.



Carneades, as we shall see hereafter, was averse to physical enquiries. Logic seems to have been more particularly the province of Cleitomachus.



(A)



(1) Arcesilas had confined himself to a polemic against the Stoics: the critique of Carneades is directed against dogmatism generally, and his followers so far imitated him as to examine each system in detail, and were indeed accused of a tedious minuteness, though Stoicism was to them as to their master the principal aim of their attacks. If we contrast the following critique on the possibility of cognition with the objections urged by the earlier philosopher, we at once see this enlargement of aim combined with greater thoroughness of investigation, yet it is substantially the result of a similar train of thought. Carneades begins with a general statement that there can be no criterion of truth, whether we suppose it to be reason, or the senses, or a representation, for they all alike deceive us. The intellectual Representation of the Stoics represents falsehood as well as truth. But even, if Representation can furnish a criterion, this criterion cannot exist apart from the affection of the mind caused by the presence of the object It is the possession of senses that distinguishes what is animate from what is inanimate, and it is through the senses, that man apprehends both himself and the external world. But the senses are not senses, and are incapable of apprehension, if they remain unmoved and impassive: it is by their being moved and acted on by the presence of the object, that they indicate the object. The criterion must therefore be sought in the affection of the mind by the presence of the object, and this affection must indicate both itself and the object whose appearance causes it Now this affection is nothing else than the representation. But like a lying messenger the representation often presents the object otherwise than it is in reality, and is at variance with what has sent it. We cannot therefore accept every representation as a criterion of truth, but that representation only which is true.

Having thus demonstrated that not a representation but only a true representation can be accepted as a criterion, Carneades proceeded to state the four following propositions.



(1) There are false representations.

(2) Such false representations may pass for true.

(3) If two representations present no distinguishing marks, they cannot be regarded, the one as true, the other as false.

(4) There is no representation by the side of which cannot be placed a false representation, which is notwithstanding indistinguishable from the true.



The first proposition has been assumed in the foregoing argument; and was disputed by no philosopher, except Epicurus: the third was allowed on all hands: the second and fourth were the contested points, and it was on them that Carneades and his disciples loved to expend their ingenuity: they defined and analyzed with a confidence in their own theories which to their opponent Antiochus seemed in strange contrast to the scepticism they professed: but the last, the old objection of Pyrrho and Arcesilas, seems to have been regarded as the most cogent and important; and, when Cicero is speaking in defence of the Academy, it is the only one that he allows is questioned. It was much insisted upon by Carneades, and supported by him with those arguments from the abnormally which are always in favour, when Psychology is in an imperfect state. In dreams and visions, we are moved by false representations, as powerfully, as if they were true: madmen too are the prey of such delusions: Hercules destroyed his own children under the firm belief, that they were the children of Eurystheus.

Nor are the general Ideas and Concepts of the Understanding, which, as derived from Experience, the Stoics valued as so authoritative, more trustworthy than the Sensual Perceptions. Objects may be so similar in shape and appearance, that they cannot be distinguished from one another. Even a poulterer can often not tell one egg from another. Lysippus may reproduce his statue of Alexander a hundred times yet no faculty nor representation enable us to decide which is a replica, and which the original. Nor are our judgments of form and distance, derived though they are from experience, by any means free from error. Sextus Empiricus, who treats of the matter in a somewhat cursory manner, ascribes them to the New Academy generally, but Zeller, who has gathered together the passages of Cicero with great skill, no doubt rightly regards them as in the main the work of Carneades. They may be arranged as the stoic theories are in the following order:—



(1) The World—its providential government and its rationality.

(2) God—The proof of His Existence. The Concept God in itself. The Polytheistic theory.



(1) The idea of a providential government is as vigorously combated by the Academy as by the Epicureans. Had God made the world for man's good, would he have placed in it wild beasts, noxious vermin, poisonous plants, all alike harmful to man? Reason is called the noblest gift of God to man. When we see how men misuse their reason, we feel rather disposed to believe in improvidence than in providence, to wonder why God has given us at all, what is abused so much. All the crimes and tragedies of our race have been the work of beings possessed of reason, and would not have been possible without the aid of reason. You may throw the blame on the vices and errors of men, but why not give them a reason that would exclude vices and errors?

The Stoics declare Folly to be the greatest evil, yet even they allow that there is no wise man to be found. If, then folly is a greater evil than all calamities of fortune and body, in what a wretched plight we must be, and if the Gods have denied to all men the blessings of wisdom and virtue, why have they denied happiness to the virtuous man? Here we find the Academy asking the old question, which has tried the faith of so many. Why should virtue and happiness be so little connected? The lot of the just man is often misery: the bad man enjoys the fruits of his wickedness. And this, too, not in small matters only—the drought that withers the crops or the hail that breaks the vine— but in the lives of great men, in the exile of Africanus, in the deaths of Scaevola and Socrates. Dionysius had a prosperous reign of eight and thirty years, though a tyrant and a plunderer of temples: the murderer of Scaevola died in his bed, consul for the seventh time! Even if the criminal meets with punishment, his crimes are often such as no punishment can compensate for. Prevention would surely have been better.

Granting that the stoic view is correct, that there is design evidenced in the economy of the world, that, as Chrysippus maintained, the pig exists to be slaughtered and eaten, that the world is the most beautiful and best world possible, all this may be explained without the hypothesis so much dwelt on by the Stoics, of a God who is the world's soul. Cannot the framework of the world be explained, as the work of Nature, acting in accordance with natural laws? It is impossible to prove that the Divine interference is necessary to the regulation and existence of the Universe: many, on the contrary, have, like Straton of Lampsacus, held that the Gods abstain from all interference with it. If regularity is a mark of divine origin, we must ascribe tertian and quartan fevers to divine interference. The truth is that so little do we know of the matter that either opinion can be entertained. These mysteries, for they really are mysteries, continues Carneades, and lie beyond the limits of our knowledge, are such that we cannot penetrate them: we do not understand our own bodies; far less the earth or the moon or sun, which we cannot dissect or anatomize. No wonder then that there are such monstrous and contradictory theories. The syllogism of Zeno is simply worthless. He argues thus:—

The rational is better than the irrational.

Nothing is better than the world.... The world is rational.

Following such a model of reasoning one can prove the world to be an excellent reader—

The literate is better than the illiterate. Nothing is better than the world.

"If," he urges, " there is something, which men cannot bring about, he, who brings it about, is superior to man. Man cannot bring about the things which are in the world. Therefore he, who has been able to bring them about, is superior to man. Now who except God could be superior to man? It is therefore God." But in both syllogisms the objector remarks the words "better," "superior," "Nature" and "Reason" are used without any attempt at accurate definition: it is assumed too that the only being higher than man is of necessity God: why should it not be nature? Nor is there much more force in another proposition put forward by Chrysippus. "If a house were beautiful, we should perceive that it was built by its masters not by mice. So therefore we should consider the world the home of the Gods." This would be valid if Chrysippus could demonstrate that the world was built, not formed by nature. As for the question of Socrates, "whence have we derived our soul if there be none in the world?" one might as well ask, whence we derived our speech, harmony or song.



(2) The stoic theory of the World Soul might lead us to suppose that the stoic Theology was pantheistic in character. In much the same spirit God is also identified with Fire, Ether, or an all pervading vapour. The expressions of Cleanthes in his well-known hymn are, on the whole, quite compatible with pantheism, and it seems to me very difficult to suppose that Carneades considered the Stoics not to hold the ultimate identity of God and the world; yet when Carneades examines the Stoic conception of God, his arguments are mainly directed against a personal Deity. We must carefully remember that he has discussed the peculiarly Stoic views in talking of the World-Soul: in the critique of the concept of a First Cause, he has in view the more common notion of Deity as well as the Stoic one. As has been already said, he discusses, firstly, the proof of His Existence, then the concept God in itself, and then the polytheistic theory. Carneades has already discussed the theory of God as connected with the world: he now passes to the proof of His Existence per se which the Stoics rested upon the argument drawn "e consensu gentium," that is, from the universality of the belief. They supported this by arguments, from the internal, from the feelings of piety, and holiness and of reverence for God which men feel and which presuppose God's existence, and from the external, from omens, auguries, &c. But, urges Carneades, the Stoics are wrong as to the fact; we know that there have been Atheists, and of the opinion of many nations we know nothing: so we cannot assert the universality: and yet, if we could, we cannot accept the judgement of an unreasoning multitude. As for the omens and auguries, their truth is doubtful; there may be a few instances of successful prediction, but they are at best happy accidents: divination has no proper province: it has no application to the knowledge obtained through the senses, or to science or philosophy, or state affairs: in necessary results it is of no avail: in accidental it is impossible.

In treating of the concept God, he concerns himself with the attributes commonly ascribed to God, particularly immortal, all-good, and all-knowing, and the somewhat rude anthropomorphism, which he evidently takes for granted even at the outset, is justified, when compared with the grosser terms that were often employed. Every living Being must have a Sensual Nature: nay, if all-knowing, must have even more than the ordinary five senses (for both parties hold all knowledge, if attainable, to be attained through the senses) and be capable of sensation, and consequently of change in the soul, all sensation producing, according to Chrysippus, a change in the soul. What is capable of sensation, is capable of perceiving the harmful, as well as its opposite, and change, produced by the harmful, is a step towards destruction. Liability to change therefore precludes the idea of immortality. Nor on the other hand can we conceive of a material nature that is indivisible, and so secure from decay. Therefore immortal cannot be predicated of God, and certainly mortal cannot. It is just the same with the other two contradictory attributes infinite and finite. Infinity is incompatible with the idea of motion, for motion must always be in space, that is, within limits also. Finite cannot be an attribute of God, for the finite as the part is inferior to the Infinite as the whole, and by the stoic hypothesis only what is best and most excellent can be ascribed to God. If then in the case of both pairs neither of the contradictory attributes can be predicated of the subject, there can be no subject for predication. Hence, considering God as a living Being, the only possible conclusion is Atheism. If we consider him as a rational Being, we must attribute to Him happiness and virtue, for the former cannot exist apart from the latter. But God, as all-virtuous, possesses all virtue. Now virtue implies an imperfection overcome. Continence supposes possible incontinence, endurance possible weakness: Courage possible cowardice.

We obviously cannot ascribe such attributes to God: they are the qualities of those who are liable to temptation, and temptations, involving, as they do, change and decay, belong only to mortals: Mortals alone can suffer from passion or danger. We are equally at fault if we predicate practical wisdom or prudence of the Deity. Practical wisdom involves the knowledge of things good and evil and of such as are styled indifferent, and thereby of pleasure and pain, for pain springs even from things indifferent. But a knowledge of pleasure and pain is as impossible to one who has not experienced the pleasurable and the painful, as a knowledge of colours to a blind man. But God has never experienced the painful and can therefore have no idea of pain, and as pleasure is merely the removal of the painful, pleasure is also unknown to Him. Prudence involves deliberation and deliberation the existence of something obscure. A Being therefore who deliberates must find that much is obscure, and cannot be supposed to have certainty on the most obscure point of all, whether or not, at some time or other, something will lead to his destruction. But a being, to whom this rests a problem without solution, must ever be a prey to fear and therefore mortal.

We may pass over some other objections where the difficulties stated are only verbal, and pass on to one of greater interest and validity. "Can we ascribe speech to God?" To deny it to him is absurd, yet the other alternative is only apparently more simple. Speech involves vocal organs, and such a conception would lead into absurdities worthy of Epicurus, anthropomorphism of the worst: Speech must be the speech of some nation—Greek or foreign, a supposition equally monstrous in such a case. And finally having shewn that it is impossible to limit the Infinite by attributes, and, that, the moment we endeavour to do so, we run ourselves into contradictions of the most hopeless character, Carneades briefly dismisses the most limiting attribute of all—corporeal as of all the most incompatible with the idea of immortality.

He naturally proceeds from this question to the consideration of the ordinary Polytheism, which the Stoics defended, partly because it testified to that universal belief in a Divine Being, which they regarded as the strongest evidence of His existence, partly because it tended to preserve that respect for Order and Law, which they always inculcated in their Ethics. Carneades' answers were couched in the form of soritae—one of which at least, we are informed, Cleitomachus greatly admired. It runs somewhat thus and turns upon the ordinary personification of natural elements as Divine Beings. If Jupiter is God, his brother Neptune is God, if Neptune, Achelous, if Achelous, the Nile, if the Nile, any river, if any river, any mountain stream. But mountain streams are not Gods: neither is Jupiter God. Again if the Sun is God, the Day (i. e. the sun above the horizon) is God; if the Day, the Month, if the Month, the Year a collection of Months. But the Year is not God: neither is the Sun God. Divination, as we have seen, found no more favour with Carneades than any other portion of the popular belief: he rejected alike the popular theology and the Monotheism of the philosophers.

His polemic against the latter I have given in a very bare outline, but the principle involved in it is easily understood: he denies the existence of God, because we cannot think of the Infinite without giving Him attributes, and the giving of these attributes at once involves us in absurdities. It is curious to observe how far Carneades has anticipated much of mediaeval and modern metaphysic: his theories when translated into English run almost insensibly into the most modern of philosophical language. The argument from design had been already so clearly stated by Aristotle, that we do not wonder at finding it criticized. In regard to the concept of God the first step had of course been made, when Xenophanes rejected with horror the popular conceptions: Aristotle had done still more, when he dwelt on the difficulty of ascribing virtues to Him, and carefully eliminated as many attributes as possible from the Conception of the First Cause. Carneades was however the first to seize on the difficulties which surround the problem, difficulties that had indeed been made more evident by the Stoic Theology. Many of his proofs are little better than fallacies of a tolerably transparent kind, but such imperfections are due partly to the time, when words often took the place of things, and partly to the difficulties of a first attempt.

He did not understand the contrast between the human and the divine: with him the divine differs from the human in degree not in kind. So far his conception falls below not only the Platonic but also the Aristotelian. The Deity he rejects is after all only a man, with more than a man s might and much of a man's caprice, and, while he saw the absurdity of the details of anthropomorphism, he never rises above a conception, which is at bottom anthropomorphous. Indeed, though I have translated, indefinite would much more accurately express the meaning of Carneades: the word is not used by him in the Pythagorean or Aristotelian sense, nor is it the modern infinite: the finite with him is merely a part of the infinite, that is, indefinite; a whole which may or may not be limited, but which is not by any means incapable of limits. If Carneades had had an adequate conception of the First Cause, he would never have supposed that he had answered the Stoics, when he substituted nature for God. He does not appear to have appreciated at its true value the higher side of their doctrine, a divine spirit of Law and Order working in the world: he never attained in fact to the idea of Cleanthes.

But Carneades finds his justification in the lower side of Stoicism. His dim perception of a natural growth apart from any Divine providence is lofty, when compared with a gross confusion of God and matter which degraded the divine without raising the

material: if he is mistaken in rejecting their appeal to the universality of the belief in a God, many illustrious names have shared his mistake, and it was the more pardonable in his age as the Stoics themselves had done their best to discredit d priori philosophy. The speculation of Carneades only needed a more propitious time to have achieved far greater results: as it is, if inferior in some respects to the noblest form of the Stoic doctrine, it was far more correct logically and possessed far more capability of development.



(B) (1) The positive side of Carneades' theories, so far as they have a positive side, is almost wholly practical and ignores all higher speculation. He accepted and enlarged the doctrine of Probability, as the true rule of life, which Arcesilas had put forward, when he rejected as impossible a criterion of knowledge that would at the same time suffice as the guide for human conduct. Like Arcesilas too, he had denied not merely that any representation could give us certainty, but that all representations were of equal value. The Academy and the Porch agreed in believing that knowledge comes through representations, and therefore it became incumbent upon one, who started from the premises of Arcesilas, and did not regard these representations as of the same worth, to arrange them according to the importance, which ought to be accorded to each, that is to say, to classify and discover the amount of probability belonging to them severally.

And this was to the Academy a more weighty matter than we might at first be disposed to believe, for one is apt to forget that by their denial of certain knowledge, they had left themselves nothing but probability. A representation according to Carneades has a twofold relation, one to the object it represents, another to the person to whom it is a representation. In the former relation, it is true, if it coincides with the object, untrue if it does not, in the latter it may appear true or appear untrue. That which appears true, possesses probability and is a probable representation; that which appears untrue to us, whether coinciding with the object or not, possesses improbabilities, and is an improbable representation, exerts no influence on our actions and cannot be a criterion of truth.

Of the former class some for various reasons, the smallness or remoteness of the object or defect of vision in the observer, are indistinct, and on that score they too may be omitted, not being capable of serving as the criterion, for neither the object represented nor the representation are sufficiently brought before us to influence our actions; but the criterion of truth is found in others, which, both appearing true, and being distinct, may according to their probability be separated into three grand divisions, each of them admitting of subdivisions. To begin with the lowest form of the criterion—when a representation itself excites a belief in its own truth without, however, possessing any extraneous support, it is termed "probable;" when it stands in connection with and is confirmed by other representations, it is termed "probable and unimpeached"; when these concurrent representations individually bear examination, it is styled probable, unimpeached, and tested.

Thus the highest amount of probability is the result of cumulative evidence: this is inevitable, for the separate representations may be false without our being able to detect the falsehood. To one or other of these three divisions we ought to refer the circumstances amidst which we live, for an unconditional "yes" or "no" is more than our faculties warrant: all that we are able to do is to attach a tolerably accurate value to the "perhaps," and the more important the question, the more accuracy ought we to endeavour to obtain. In matters of but slight moment the first grade of probability will suffice, for those of greater consequence the second; the third Carneades would reserve for those which were in his eyes and in the eyes of his contemporaries the most weighty, those which pertain to happiness.



(2) As might readily be conjectured, the Ethics of the Academy are much coloured by this theory of probability: but we are ignorant of the manner in which it was applied: the senses can, except on the Epicurean principles, be no source of knowledge in ethical matters, and, as Zeller remarks, it is very difficult to understand on what grounds Carneades rested his scheme of Probability and distinguished the various grades of it. We could not consistently look for a subjective criterion. Yet not only did he extend his doctrine of Probability to moral questions, but he expressly defended the freedom of the Will against the Stoics, and according to the account given by Cicero in the fragment that has come down to us of his treatise "De Fato," he rested his argument on the fact that there are things which are in our own power. If all things are the results of antecedent causes, all things are but links of a chain of causes and effects, and necessity is all powerful: but this is not so, for some things are in our own power, and bur will is not the result of antecedent and external causes. It seems almost impossible to reconcile either of these positions with the rest of what we know of Carneades' philosophy, and certainly the conjecture of Zeller, that he regarded the freedom of the will as only probable, seems opposed to what little information we have on the matter.

As regards the conduct of life, we do not find that Carneades dogmatically selected and proposed a Highest Good as the aim of life. The art of living—for Carneades, differing in this respect from the Pyrrhoneans, does recognize an art of living— cannot, any more than any other art, dispense with a moving principle, and therefore an ideal is requisite to give to action first an impulse and afterwards consistency. The problem is approached with some caution, and Carneades begins by laying down two requisites essential, in his opinion, to the concept of the Highest Good, (1) It must be accordant with, not opposed to nature: (2) it must be capable of exciting a craving in the mind. He finds only three ends, or rather motives, which fulfil these conditions. They are Pleasure — Freedom from Pain — Things the most simple and natural (prima secundum naturam), such as Health, Beauty, &c. We may regard either the attainment of one of these ends or a life regulated by conformity to one of them as the Highest Good, so that, as each of the ends can be viewed in this double aspect, there are in all six possible Ideals. It is evident that our choice of an Ideal will greatly modify our whole theory of Right and Wrong: for instance, if pleasure be our aim, our conception of right will inevitably be based upon our desire for pleasure.

Further than this, Carneades did not go: he pointed out the results of a selection but he declined to commit himself to real opinion. Such an attitude, which however the Sceptics censured

as too affirmative for a sceptic, was the almost unavoidable consequence of the situation of the Academy. Carneades could not fix on any particular Good without openly becoming a dogmatist: he could not deny the existence of a Highest Good without placing himself in direct and violent hostility to his own age.

Now and again he seems to have espoused some one or other of the many fancies, which were put forward on this the favourite problem of later Greek philosophy, but he more generally contented himself with rebuking the extravagances of the contending sects. More especially when viewed on this side, his teaching is marked by much of that sanity, which had formed so glorious a feature of Greek thought in all its inquiries during its earlier and better days, but which had been greatly weakened by the decay and disintegration, that had been the fate of Hellas under the Macedonian rule. He deprecated the endeavour to live very strictly and narrowly in accordance with a preconceived system, and found fault with the way, in which the Stoics appeared to glory in trampling upon the real needs and weaknesses of man's nature, and throughout, his views, if not so noble in aspiration, had more real humanity than theirs Cicero reports that it was owing to his keen polemic, that they modified the rigour of their doctrine, and allowed to external reputation, which they had hitherto affected altogether to despise, an independent value of its own, by placing it among things desirable. The wise man, he maintained, sometimes indulges in opinion: he is affected but not crushed by circumstances; and with that lack of or rather contempt for patriotism which was common to his age, he told the Carthaginian Cleitomachus that he thought a philosopher would not be greatly troubled if his native country were conquered. Great warmth of feeling was inconsistent with a system, which was founded on good sense: its more natural outcome was a sober moderation which neither rises to the sublime nor sinks into the extravagant.



(3) Towards the popular theology Carneades preserved such an attitude, as might be anticipated. He had dogmatically rejected Monotheism, and after his reasonings in that discussion he should, to be consistent, have rejected Polytheism. He indeed ridiculed Its personifications of the material elements, when they were defended by the Stoics, but from respect to popular prejudices, he refrained from open hostility to the popular religion, and claimed the sceptic's privilege of abstaining from giving a decided opinion for or against it. He neither, like Plato, cared for the truths disguised, but not wholly concealed, in its Mythology, nor, like Zeno, valued it for its old associations and present influence. He as far as possible disregarded it.

As might be anticipated, the New Academy paid much attention to the dilemma and the fallacies: but in spite of his dexterity in the use of Logic, Carneades apparently neglected its theory, and this seems to have been the peculiar province of his pupil Cleitomachus. A Carthaginian, and originally called Hasdrubal, he lectured on philosophy in his native city and in the Punic language. When forty years of age, it may be on the breaking out of the third Punic war, he repaired to Athens, where he attached himself to Carneades. A favourite pupil, he transmitted to posterity the doctrines of his master; and so indefatigable was his industry, that he composed no less than 400 books, one of which he dedicated to L. Censorinus, Cons. B.C. 149, and another to the satirist C. Lucilius.

He died some time after B. C. 111, in which year Crassus the orator heard him lecture. He adhered closely to the doctrines that had now become identified with the Academy, though he was well versed in the Stoic and Peripatetic systems, and apparently wrote a history of philosophy; and his Logic was accordingly formal in its tendency. Logic, he declared, is, as the Stoics assert, a part, and the Peripatetics assert, an instrument of philosophy, an instrument so far as its laws are formal and divorced from all consideration of things—so far as they are founded upon things, a part of philosophy. For instance, if you say, from two universal principles the conclusion is universal.

The soul is endowed with perpetual motion; that which is endowed with perpetual motion is self-moved. The soul is self-moved; in such a case Logic ought to be considered part of philosophy.

Beyond this view of the functions of Logic we have little information about the logical efforts of Cleitomachus. He made Logic subservient to the Academic Scepticism, and we find him preserving the Sorites, with which Carneades attacked Polytheism.

With Cleitomachus Scepticism ceased in the Academy; those who came after him were Eclectics, men, who in the decay of philosophical thought endeavoured to form new systems by combining the labours of the past, not always with much heed as to the congruity of the elements they strove to mix together. Scepticism had failed to excite a reaction, and died out apparently from the want of a new dogmatic system to attack: we shall pass on to its revival under the Roman Empire.





THE LATER SCEPTICS





However important to the general history of Scepticism, the later Sceptics can find place in this Essay only so far as they were Pyrrhoneans. That is, filled up the outlines of Pyrrho's doctrines and persevered with the work he had commenced. Between him and them too elapsed a considerable portion of time, though the exact date of Enesidemus the first reviver of Ancient Scepticism has been much disputed: their last important representative Sextus Empiricus can be placed with tolerable certainty in the first half of the 3rd century. Fabricius conjectures that Enesidemus flourished a little before the time of Cicero: his evidence is a passage quoted from Enesidemus by Photius in his Muriobiblion

This he supposes to be a reference to Antiochus, one of Cicero's instructors, who, as is well known, though head of the Academy, approximated in his speculations somewhat closely to the Stoics. L. Tubero is said to be Cicero's friend Lucius Elius Tubero. This conjecture has however been rejected, and I believe justly, by Ritter and M. Saisset. If a distinguished philosopher, as Enesidemus by all accounts was, had been engaged in reviving Scepticism in Alexandria in Cicero's youth, we can hardly believe that Cicero would class Pyrrho and Herillus together as "diu abjecti," or call his philosophy "jamdiu fracta et extincta," and the doubt is, I think, confirmed by the absence of any mention of Enesidemus in Seneca. M. Saisset would therefore refer his date to the end of the first century of the Christian Era; but even this, I think, is too early.

Aristocles was the master of the Aphrodisian, who flourished in the reigns of Septimius Severus and Caracalla, and cannot be placed much before A. D. 170, which would certainly not allow us to put Enesidemus before A. D. I30, The argument, that might be brought against this supposition derived from the list given by Diogenes Laertius, is untrustworthy, as the list is certainly incomplete.

Pyrrhonism died out almost immediately after the death of Timon: it was not revived till Enesidemus saw in it a fitting means of clearing the way for his Heracleitean theories: with those theories we have at present little concern: it is with his scepticism only that we have to do. His famous work treated of metaphysical, physical, and moral problems: but the points of most importance are the ten tropes and his argument on Causality.

The ten tropes were intended to contain a refutation of Dogmatism in all possible forms.

The first has reference to the uncertainty of the senses, and the different ways in which different animals are affected by the representations of the same object. Some animals have one sense highly developed, some another.

The second continues this argument, the examples however being entirely drawn from men. Demophon the steward of Alexander felt, it is said, warm in the shade and shivered in the sun. Andron the Argive hardly felt thirst, and other such instances are quoted.

The third contains the same arguments showing that the same object appears in different aspects according to the sense to which it is submitted. An apple is yellow to the sight, sweet to the taste, fragrant to the smell: had we more senses we might discover other qualities.

The fourth enlarges on the dispositions of the subject, and the effect of such influences as sleep, waking, joy, grief, hunger, thirst, &c. When our states are so variable, we cannot know when we are in the proper state to judge rightly of things external.

Whatever criterion we offer requires proof, but an indisputable proof is impossible, for we have no criterion. We can therefore form no judgment on representations of what is without.

The fifth trope (in Diogenes Laertius the seventh) begins the question of the relation of subject and object Distance and position, roughly speaking, make an immense difference in the appearance of an object. Here we come on the objections of Carneades. The dove's neck varies as it changes: square objects sometimes appear round, straight ones bent &c.

The sixth trope refers to manner of perception: it reminds us that we see objects always through some medium, air, vapour, fog. Our eyes too, the instruments, are liable to water and to be covered by films; and the other senses, the ear and the nose, &c. are subject to various changes, all of which prevent our knowing the object as it is.

The seventh (in Diogenes the eighth) treats of the quantity and modes of the object. Things vary according to their quantity. Scrapings of goat's horn are white, the horn itself black: scrapings of silver black, a mass of silver white, and so with others. A small amount of wine strengthens us, a large amount weakens us.

The eighth (in Diogenes the tenth), in part a repetition of the preceding ones, dwells on the relativity of all phenomena. All objects are relative.

firstly to the subject—secondly to one another. What IS genus in one relation is species in another. The same man may be son, brother, father.

The ninth is on the strength of association. What is familiar to us excites no wonder in us: we admire what is strange because it is strange.

The tenth (in Diogenes the fifth) continues the same train of thought. It shows the influence of custom and law, religion and opinion, and the different standards of right and wrong adopted by different nations.

These ten tropes scarcely merit the reputation they acquired in antiquity: they do not contain anything that had not been at least as well said before, and they do not atone for their lack of novelty by any precision of scientific arrangement. In many of the latter ones we find partially repeated the substance of the former: it is difficult to detect either any order in their arrangement, or any regular process by which they have been reached. They all enounce more or less directly the relativity of human knowledge, but that is the only thread of connection which runs through them. Sextus would class the first four as relating to the judging subject, the seventh and tenth to the object judged, and the rest as relating both to the subject and object; but in one and all we miss any clearly drawn distinction of subject and object, any attempt to discriminate the nature of the antithesis between them, and the means of overcoming it,.

The number of illustrations, with which Sextus Empiricus loads them, does not avail to disguise the fact that there is very little in them that had not been far more ably urged by the earlier sophists. The argument in regard to causality is, however, of more importance, and it is difficult to believe that it is due to the same author.

The following arrangement is due to M. Saisset. Each proposition except the last contains at least two contradictory statements, both of which are refuted. Proposition 1, comprising 4 hypotheses: Hypotheses 1 and 2.—The corporeal is the cause of the corporeal. The incorporeal is the cause of the incorporeal. Disproof. If A were cause of B, it would produce it, either by remaining itself, or joining itself to C. In the former case it would produce nothing different from itself, for, suppose a unity A could cause a duality A, B, each element of this duality could cause a new duality, and so on ad infin; in the latter case union of C with either of these two letters would produce a fourth, these a fifth, and so on ad infin.

The incorporeal, too, is intangible; it cannot act on another, or be acted on by another.

Hypotheses 3 and 4. The corporeal is cause of the incorporeal. The incorporeal is cause of the corporeal.

Disproof. The incorporeal is not contained in the corporeal, nor vice versa: or rather if the one be contained in the other, it is not produced by it.

Proposition 2. If cause and effect are both in motion, or both at rest, neither of these two terms can be the cause of the other: If one is in motion, the other at rest, neither can be cause of the other. For a cause only produces what is contained in its own nature, and here the two terms are heterogeneous.

Proposition 3. The cause cannot be contemporaneous with the effect, for then the effect would possess existence independent of the cause; nor anterior, for a cause without an effect is no cause; nor posterior, for in that case there would be an effect without a cause.

Proposition 4. The cause produces its effect itself, or produces its effect by aid of passive matter: the first hypothesis is contrary to experience: on the second the passive matter would be as much an agent as the cause proper.

Proposition 5. The cause has several powers, or it has one only. If only one, it would always produce the same effect, which is contrary to experience; if several, it ought to manifest all of them in its action, which is also contrary to experience.

Proposition 6. (1) The agent is separate from the patient. (2) The agent is not separate from the patient. If the first, the action of the one is possible without the action of the other. If the second, they will operate by contact; but the difficulties of such action are insoluble. Proposition 7 forms a syllogism: The cause is relative to the effect. But relative ideas have only an imaginary existence. The cause has only an imaginary existence.

Sextus Empiricus fills a large part of Book 9, according to the ordinary numbering of his work, Adversus Mathematicos, with a dissertation upon cause and effect. After arguing at considerable length against causality, he adds that Enesidemus had treated of the subject with more clearness, and proceeds to state the propositions given above. There are some lacunae, Sextus adopting his usual plan of not repeating those points in an argument which he has happened to have stated already; but the purport and tendency of the two passages are very similar. It is unnecessary to repeat both; and M. Saisset has supplemented the lacunae in the argument given to Enesidemus, from what comes before it. They were probably taken from the fifth book of his treatise, which we know was entirely devoted to the subject. Throughout Enesidemus presupposes the truth of Materialism. Hence he assumes, in arguing against the very first hypothesis he enunciates, the maxims: "A cause cannot produce that which is not contained in its own nature;" and "A cause must be tangible, i. e. act by contact."

He shows this particularly in his second proposition, where he says a cause must either be in motion or at rest; evidently excluding thereby the possibility of the existence of cause and effect out of space. These materialistic hypotheses he uses in his first five propositions; assuming in each of them that contact is necessary to the action of a cause,—and in the sixth he turns round and denies it. He advances the exception commonly taken in antiquity to the possibility of contact; confusing the abstract notion of contact with the physical fact. The seventh proposition is far more striking than the preceding ones. It shows that in the first six Enesidemus was more or less directly combating what he saw to be an error, the giving an absolute value to the principle of causality; the selfsame error that Kant attacks in his transcendental dialectic. As a materialist he would necessarily suppose that, if he could show that causality has only a subjective value, he had shown its absurdity. The very conclusion that he regards as fatal to the doctrine of causality is the one which Kant endeavoured to prove is the only tenable one; that causality is a condition, and a necessary condition, of thought It is interesting to observe the difference between the scepticism of Enesidemus and that of Hume.

The former starts from a really materialistic point of view, and shows the absurdity of the doctrine of causality when upheld on materialistic grounds: the latter, starting from the standpoint of Locke (one in reality intellectual), destroyed materialism when he pointed out that we have no perception of the connection of cause and effect in the external world. Had Enesidemus ever seen this it would have solved most of the difficulties at once; as it is, his speculations may be said to signalize the high water-mark of Greek speculation in respect to causality: they have a universal interest that is wanting to a great deal of his own and of Carneades' polemic against the Stoics, and they involve far more real difficulties, far more clearly stated, than are to be found in his ten tropes. His so-called eight tropes deserve notice for the judicious and stringent character of their criticism, but belong rather to the history of the natural sciences than of Metaphysics. They are directed against that false method of preferring theory to observation, and of observing facts through the light of a preconceived hypothesis, which vitiated so much of the natural science of the

ancients, and produced those strange contradictions which led Carneades to declare that science treated of what was beyond the reach of the human faculties. They stand solitary among the achievements of the Pyrrhoneans in this respect, that they are not sceptical but critical, not subversive but intended to reform a mistaken methodology.

We cannot accord to Enesidemus the praise of consistency. As has been already mentioned, he used scepticism only as preparatory to a revival of the Heracleitean philosophy, and the opinions of Enesidemus the Heracleitean are often curiously at variance with those of Enesidemus the Sceptic.

The Sceptic argues against the possibility of a criterion in the spirit of Pyrrho. Like him, he will not allow of knowledge through both the reason and the senses: they are in his view antagonistic, and the trustworthiness of the one necessitates the untrustworthiness of the other. Among the conflicting judgments of mankind it is impossible to find a sure criterion. The things perceived by the senses are either generic or individual; the latter can lay claim only to relative, not absolute truth, for the knowledge of man is relative. To prove the reality of a genus, one is compelled to mount up to the highest genus.

Now the truth or falsehood of this would involve the truth or falsehood of all contained under it. Besides, how can the senses comprehend a genus? These arguments probably filled part of the fourth book of the great work of Enesidemus. The first book was introductory, and stated the absolute scepticism of the Pyrrhoneans in the most unqualified manner; the second took up the True, Cause, Affection, Motion, Generation and Decay. To this book I am inclined to refer the eight tropes, though Fabricius would place them in book five; the third book treated of Motion, the Senses and their qualities; the fourth of the theory of Signs, Nature, the World and the Gods ; the fifth of the theory of Causality already given; the last three books were ethical; the sixth treating of Good and Evil; the seventh of the Stoic theory of Virtues, and the eighth of the summum bonum. The arguments were apparently similar to those used by Sextus in the eleventh book of his treatise Adversus Mathematicos, and touched upon in the tenth trope. His conclusion is that only an end agreed upon by all men (such is Zeller's interpretation of the passage in Photius) can be accepted, and there is no such end. Enesidemus also wrote Pyrrhonean Outlines and some works devoted to expounding his Heracleitean system.

This positive element which Enesidemus attempted to introduce into Scepticism was not accepted by his successors, and probably on this ground they were distinguished from him, and were alone in strictness called the later Sceptics, in contrast to the earlier Sceptics, among whom even Enesidemus was classed. They too made some advances.

The famous ten tropes possessed no such internal coherence as to defy any attempt to abridge their number: we hear of a reduction of the ten to two: a more celebrated one is that of Agrippa the fifth philosopher, we are told, in descent from Enesidemus. In this reduction the original ten tropes are contained in the first and third tropes: the other three contain what, if not novel, was yet not included in the ten.



I. Dwells on the uncertainty of customs and opinions.

II. On the accumulation of proof: one proof requires another, and so on ad infin.

III. Things change as their relations change.

IV. Truth is but hypothetical.

V. You prove the truth of the criterion, and then require a criterion to prove the proof.



The list of Diogenes Laertius does not include Agrippa, though the tropes are ascribed to him in the life of Pyrrho. After Enesidemus it contains no notable name till we come to the last but one, Sextus Empiricus. Like many of the later sceptics, a physician, and in spite of his surname belonging to the school of the Methodici, he wrote a considerable number of treatises, in which he gathered together the objections of all preceding sceptics. What remains to us is a work entitled the Pyrrhonean Hypotheses in three books, and two others which are commonly joined together under the designation Adversus Mathematicos and form eleven books. The Pyrrhonean Hypotheses are at once the oldest and best of these writings. They give an outline of the sceptical system, and the details are supplied in Adv. Math. Books VII.—XI. which form a direct continuation.

The first book of the Hypotheses is introductory, and opens with the definition of Scepticism, its nature and purpose. The ten tropes are then given, and a curious psychological discussion interposed on the question, whether the lower animals are possessed of reasoning powers equal to man’s or not: this question is decided in the affirmative. The ten tropes are followed by Agrippa's five and the two, and the eight of Enesidemus. The sceptical maxims are next discussed.

The differences are pointed out between Scepticism and the systems that had been brought most nearly in contact with it. These are the following: (1) the Heracleitean; (2) the Democritean; (3) Cyrenaic; (4) Protagorean; Academic; and the Scepticism of the Empirical Physicians.



Book II commences the controversial portion of the treatise with a discussion of a question which might not unnaturally occur, whether the sceptic through his profession of ignorance is debarred from comprehending, and therefore discussing, the theories of the Dogmatists. This difficulty disposed of, the subject is divided, as had been done by the Stoics, into metaphysics, physics, and ethics. Of course the first thing mooted in metaphysics is the question of the criterion.

The criterion is discussed, (1) in respect to the judging subject; (2) the instrument of judging; (3) the object judged. The reasons given for rejecting the criterion are, (1) In regard to the judging subject (or man) himself, as was shown in the fourth trope, philosophers are not agreed: his nature and powers are very variously defined, and we cannot be said to comprehend him. The very assertion, that man is the judge, is an assumption, and it is not agreed whether the judge is to be the individual man or a typical man (like the stoic wise man), or the majority of men. Mankind will never unite in fixing on an individual whose opinion is to be accepted as decisive: the supremely wise man, supposing such a person to exist, will be too wise for the rest of men: from his very wisdom he will be able to make the worse appear the better reason: we cannot trust him: for the opinion of the majority Sextus has no more respect than Arcesilas. (2) The instrument of judging is shown to be untrustworthy, whether the senses or the intellect, or both. The senses are criticised in the usual way: as to the intellect we know nothing of its nature: Gorgias believed there was no such thing: to Heracleitus it was all in all: the senses and the intellect are often at variance, and those of one person differ from those of another. (3) The object judged is discussed, but entirely with reference to the stoic theory of representation, and with. arguments modelled after those of Carneades. After the criterion has been rejected, Sextus curiously thinks it necessary to discuss the possibility of truth.

The mention of the leads to a discussion of the stoic theory of signs, and its rejection on similar grounds to those advanced against the criterion. A sign, that merely acts on the law of association, which reminds us of what we have perceived in connection with it, Sextus allows of it must be the same to all, if subjective it would itself need a sign. If there can be no sign, there can be no probation; and this leads Sextus to his well-known polemic against Logic, which is classified under the following heads :



Probation

Syllogisms

Induction

Definition

Division

Genus and Species, and Accident

Fallacies



Probation cannot of itself give conviction; it has no virtue of its own; it is impossible to detect a fallacious argument, one in which there is no consecution between the premises and the conclusion, for we should require first to test the concatenation of the premises: there are no d priori forms of probation. A probation too is relative: the premises and conclusion are in a fluctuating relation and the relative is not; every probation involves an opinion, and an opinion is a matter of controversy. The validity of the syllogism falls with that of probation. Take:



All men are human beings

Socrates is a man

... Socrates is a human being.



The major premise can only be posited after the fullest induction, which would involve the examination of the minor premise and conclusion. The syllogism therefore is a mere reasoning in a circle: this holds good too in hypothetical syllogisms. A complete Induction is impossible. Definition, Division, &c. are discussed mostly in reference to the Stoic Logic; Fallacies are rejected as being unavailable for the discrimination of truth and falsehood.

The third book opens with the question of causality, including the conception of the Deity as the First Cause. The difficulties started have already been stated in speaking of Enesidemus and Carneades. The next subject is comparatively poorly handled. Material principles, such as those of the Ionic philosophers, are first stated and dismissed. Then matter and its modes are treated of in a perfunctory manner. Matter cannot be considered as agent and patient, for then a cause would be implied: considered in respect of its qualities, it is liable to the difficulties about contact used by Enesidemus in reference to the theory of causality: besides, it cannot be classified among things sensible or things intelligible. After a number of quibbles about addition and diminution, &c., founded on the confusion of physics and metaphysics. Space and Time form, with Number, the conclusion of the section on Physics. The objections to Space, Time and Number, considered as objective realities, are urged with much skill and at some length; as to the first, however, Sextus allows that, while his argument tends the other way, space is too present to admit of the Sceptic's being sceptical in this instance.

Ethics he defines as concerned with the Good, the Bad, and the Indifferent. Seeing the number of opinions held regarding the Good and the Bad, he concludes, after a short dissection of the stoic theory, that the concepts Good and Bad rest on an artificial and not a natural basis. Where a Highest Good is proposed, the question arises, whether the thing striven for or the strife to obtain it, is the real Good. The latter is inadmissible, as there is an end beyond the strife, and the former, because men have entirely different conceptions of good. It is impossible to suppose that, what is outside the soul altogether can be the end that it strives for, and we know too little of the soul to hazard an assertion as to what is good for it. Its very existence is hypothetical. The idea, too, of this strife after good and of avoidance of evil upsets the whole peace of life, for it involves us in a chronic state of disquietude and desire for that which is never obtained. And the differences of opinion as to what is good and what evil are the cause of great diversities of national usage. Death seemed to Cleobis and Biton a great good—to some life is a great evil.

The sceptic seeing such confusion of belief and custom, will practise liro, and follow the ordinary manner of life. An art of living is impossible; for the duties of life fall upon the ignorant as well as the learned: more especially an art in the Stoic sense, for that involves an acceptance of the Stoic metaphysics. The refinements attempted by the Stoics have only led them into extravagances. There can indeed be no teacher and no learner of an art of living.

The outlines thus furnished in the Hypotheses are filled up in the treatise which forms the latter part of the work Adversus Mathematicos, The metaphysical topics fill books 7 and 8 of the ordinary numeration, the physical books 9 and 10, the ethical book 11. Valuable as a quarry for materials, these books have much less scientific merit than the Hypotheses. Though always a clear writer, Sextus has amassed a large amount of material, and put it together not always in good order, and often without much heed as to whether his work was internally consistent. Beyond good sense and clearness and industry, Sextus had not many of the qualifications needful to an historian of philosophy. The only dogmatic system he was thoroughly versed in was that of the Stoics. As M. Saisset has remarked, he evidently was very imperfectly acquainted with Plato; Aristotle he probably knew only at second hand, and even Epicurus he did not know well. The first two books contain a critique more curious than valuable on Grammar and Rhetoric; in the third and fourth Geometry and Arithmetic are criticised, most of the arguments being the same as Sextus employs in his books on Physics; Astronomy and Music occupy the fifth and sixth books, but the whole six really form a separate treatise, and have no proper connection with the last five. They are of small importance, and do not directly bear on the subject of this Essay. Besides them Sextus appears to have been the author of two other books, including one on the Soul.

In spite of the wide diffusion of the Pyrrhonean doctrines, especially among physicians of the Empirical school, in the second and early part of the third centuries, a fact to which Galen bears testimony, there is no distinguished name that we can add to the list of sceptics except that of Favorinus of Arelate the friend of Herodes Atticus and the teacher of Aulus Gellius, who introduced into the law courts the arguments of the New Academy. Between it and Pyrrhonism he appears to have wavered; we know he wrote ten books of Pyrrhonean Tropes; but all his numerous writings have perished, and there is no material for following the history of the School either in the period that elapsed between Agrippa and Sextus Empiricus, or in subsequent times. The canon, if we may so call it, of sceptical writers closes with Sextus. With the beginnings of New Platonism we have as little concern as with the Eclecticism which intervened between Cleitomachus and Enesidemus. Our material is complete, and it only remains to compare the New Academy with Pyrrho.





THE PYRRHONEANS AND NEW ACADEMY CONTRASTED





In the introduction to his account of the Pyrrhonean doctrines Sextus is, as we have seen, careful to distinguish them from those of other philosophers, separating them from the Heracleitean philosophy which had been connected with it by Enesidemus, from the Democritean, which Pyrrho himself had studied and admired, from the Cyrenaic, to the ethics of which they somewhat approximated, from that of Protagoras, who took so considerable a part in the first revolt against Dogmatism, and lastly from the Academic. This is the question I now propose to enter into. It is one that was much discussed in antiquity as well as in modern times.

We find Sextus Empiricus asserting that there are three classes of philosophers: the Dogmatists who declare that knowledge is attainable, the Academics who deny that it can be attained, and the Sceptics who are engaged in the search for it.

Aulus Gellius devotes a short chapter of the Nodes to the discussion of the point. "Vetus," he begins, "quaestio et a multis scriptoribus Graecis tractata est, an quid et quantum inter Pyrrhonios et Academicos philosophos intersit."

The discussion has been continued in modern times: most writers of the last century (Bayle notably) regarding the two schools as identical; in this century however the opposite opinion has prevailed. M. Thorbecke has argued at some length for a difference," and somewhat similar views have been adopted by Hegel and Zeller.

It is better not to confine the enquiry to the differences that Sextus would establish between his own school and the New Academy, but to take it in a wider form and compare the two theories in --



1. Origin.

2. Aim.

3. Method.



Pyrrho lived at a time, when the warning words of the Platonic Socrates were peculiarly applicable. "Let us beware," he says, "of turning misologists as men turn misanthropists, for a man cannot fall a victim to a greater evil than misology. Misology and misanthropy come to pass in the same fashion. For a man assumes misanthropy after he has trusted some one without limit and without heed, supposing him to be at all times truly sound-hearted and trustworthy: shortly afterwards he finds this man, and subsequently another to be a scoundrel and a traitor. Whensoever this has befallen a man frequently, and more especially at the hands of those whom he supposed to be his nearest and dearest friends, from constant chagrin he begins to loathe all men and to suppose that there is nothing that is not rotten." If this caution was at all appropriate to the age of Plato, it was far more appropriate to that of Pyrrho; for Pyrrho's was an age of misology, and Pyrrho the most thorough-going misologist of the age.

The intellect of Greece was suffering from that depression which always follows a period of great speculative activity: it had carried philosophy to a height never before attained: it sank back in doubt whether there be any truth in philosophy. The same problems had been discussed and re-discussed in manifold shapes and forms, and the solution was to all appearance as far distant as ever. Such a period of depression prevailed between the decay of Scholasticism and Descartes, between Wolf and the publication of the Critique of Pure Reason. But in Greece the depression was, as I have already endeavoured to show, heightened by the fall of Greek liberties and the declining vigour of the Greek mind. The former cause needs no further mention here. In earlier days, when the Greek mind was in the full maturity of power, doubt had assumed no unhealthy form. Aristotle remarks with an antithetical vigour which no translation can give to but scepticism so hopeless and so complete as the Pyrrhonean was unknown to him, except as the reductio ad absurdum, to which the nihilism of some sceptics ought logically to lead. Imperfectly as the scheme was at first worked out, for all new schemes in their infancy must "stammer," it was not an attack on this or that philosophy: it was the offspring of despair, and its verdict was a complete abnegation of enquiry. Now the New Academy sprang from very different causes. In the first place, it came into being some fifty years later; and in a country like Greece, whose whole history as the home of an independent nation was so short, fifty years were a long period and saw many changes. Political circumstances had almost no influence in speculation, for the old union of speculation and action had passed away.

Athens had become a cypher in the contests of kingdoms and nations: but more than ever was it the centre of the philosophical activity. The downfall of the small republics and the roving habits which the wide extension of Hellas had created, had made philosophers philosophers by profession without any tie of kindred or country. The philosophers of Athens were but seldom Athenians: not always Greeks. Take the Stoics, the least sophistic of all: Zeno of Citium, Cleanthes of Assos, Herillus of Carthage, Ariston of Chios, &c. It is not surprising that among men so situated the sophistic tendency became strong again, and of this tendency Arcesilas was in his day the most illustrious representative. The revolution in the course of philosophy which found its expression more especially in Zeno was in process of fulfilment, and his scepticism is by no means the result of despair.

It is true that the Stoic and Epicurean systems were far narrower and more confined in their range than the Platonic and Aristotelian, and that they were individualistic to a degree that was logically fatal to coherence, but they were still in their youth, and, even if the old confidence was wanting, there was a renewed belief in the possibility of attaining knowledge. As I have already endeavoured to show, Arcesilas was led by a concurrence of causes to assault the Stoics: he does not seem to have been led to it by any profound conviction: he attacked a rival school with the weapons he borrowed from Pyrrho, not because he believed in the impossibility of knowledge, but because he believed Pyrrhonism to be the best means of refuting a dogmatic theory; he made use of Pyrrhonism as he might have used ‘the reaper’ or any other of the fallacies which were so highly esteemed in that controversial age. Carneades, a more earnest and a profounder thinker, did not content himself with a bare negative: the care he took in building up and enlarging his doctrine of probability indicates that he considered a negative an unsatisfactory position. He did not see his way to a downright "yes," but he shrank from a complete "no."

The view he took of the province of philosophy will be more conveniently discussed when we come to speak of the method of the Academy: suffice it to say that though he was probably more thoroughly convinced than Arcesilas of the limited power of the human faculties, he was far from adopting the Pyrrhonean stand-point, and the wide difference between them was recognized by the indirect as well as by the direct testimony of antiquity. The Pyrrhonists were always regarded as the foes of philosophy: the Academics were never suspected of abandoning philosophy. They were indeed accused by the Stoics of sapping the true grounds of morality, by the Epicureans of putting forward a rule of life, that was poor in theory and impossible in practice, but these were only the accusations of sects, who at least supposed that there was some ground held in common by themselves and their opponents. Nor did the Academics themselves knowingly deny philosophy. Cicero, who professed to be a disciple of Carneades, had no idea that he was not as much a student of philosophy, and a believer in its possibility as Cato or Balbus. Somewhat forgetful apparently of the way Arcesilas had appropriated the Pyrrhonean method, he classes Pyrrhonism and the doctrines of Herillus together as long-exploded heresies; and Seneca, while he recognizes the New Academy as a philosophical sect, exclaims: "Quis est qui tradat praecepta Pyrrhonis?"

As regards the summum bonum, the Pyrrhonists were in harmony with their age, the difference between them, the Stoics, and the Epicureans being more apparent than real; the aim of the Pyrrhonists was ataraxas to be attained by means of hroyri. This they allowed could only be attained to in certain matters: in those which they called "necessary" they were obliged to obey phenomena: such at least was their doctrine in later times: to them, as to the other schools of their time, philosophy was only a means to happiness. The one party sought knowledge in order to obtain it: with the very same end in view the other enforced ignorance. In this point on the other hand the Academy stood alone: Carneades (for the opinions of Arcesilas. in this matter we know too imperfectly to speak of them with any confidence) did not disregard that connection with practical life which ran through the philosophy of the time. But in his time, a hundred years after the death of Zeno, men were far less confident than they had been, that a very strictly defined course of life would give them the result they longed for. Every species of end, it seemed, had been proposed, and it was not felt that any of these ends had conferred the anticipated benefits. Strict conformity to the letter had betrayed all sects into extravagance, and Carneades was only acting in accordance with his own principles and the feelings of the time, when he declined to make any particular choice. He thus gave his own school the enormous advantage, that his moral philosophy was essentially popular, a philosophy of the milieu, which avoided both the asceticism of the Stoics and the cold quiet of the Pyrrhonists, a quiet that had in it far more that was attractive to the Oriental than the Greek, and that never, as far as we know, found an ardent disciple to carry it into practice.

The practical teaching of the Academy was the echo of a prevailing sentiment: it was marked by good sense rather than profound insight, good feeling rather than profound principles. When we come to consider the methods of the two schools, it is somewhat difficult to institute a comparison. The history of the New Academy is short It arose, developed and flourished under much the same influences: it began and ended in Athens ; for its Roman supporters are not sufficiently important to detain us here. Pyrrhonism began in republican Elis, when Greek liberty was passing away. After the death of Timon it ceased to attract disciples or defenders, and unhonoured and unnoticed during nearly four hundred years, it was revived under the Roman Empire, in circumstances that had little in common with those amidst which it began. It could not be expected that the later disciples should adhere without important deviations to a system which was so far removed from them. But these deviations can only be important in so far as they illustrate the teaching of Pyrrho: what was engrafted upon that, by borrowing from the Academy, must as a matter of course be restored to the source from which it was taken. When that is done, it is surprising how little in the bulky works of Sextus is suited to our purpose. The truth is, that Scepticism has not many principles.

It is their application which forms at once its strength and its complexities, and the application of Pyrrhonism was first made by the New Academy and not by the Pyrrhonists. The three questions proposed by Pyrrho contained the kernel of the doctrine: the answer to the first question was that we have no knowledge of Things as they are in themselves, an answer quite in accordance with the general drift of the post-Aristotelian philosophy. The Absolute being thus destroyed, it only remained for the Pyrrhoneans to destroy the Relative, and it was to this end that their method was directed. This hostility to the Relative dominated, as we have frequently seen, in the whole of their polemic, and placed them in that position of unqualified scepticism, in which they seem to have taken an almost childish delight, using phrase after phrase to express the attitude they regarded as so admirable. We find even Enesidemus declaring "that none of them (sc. the Pyrrhoneans) has said at all that all things are incomprehensible or comprehensible, and no more that they are such or such, at one time such and at another time not such, or to one such to another not such, to another not existent at all, and a good deal more in the same strain. It is very curious that they were not more conscious of the suicidal effect of their own method. Aristocles points it out, and it had doubtless been remarked by others, for Sextus makes a lame and unsatisfactory attempt to show that he was not a dogmatist.

Pyrrhonism must not be confounded with other Scepticisms, and it is not fair to shelter it by an appeal to other thinkers, whose premises were very different, even if their methods were somewhat analogous. It was quite open to Hume for instance, to maintain that he could question the reasons of our belief in an external world, and yet believe in its existence. "We may well ask," he remarks, "what causes induce us to believe in the existence of body, but it is vain to ask whether there is body or not, that is a point which we must take for granted in all reasonings."

The Pyrrhonists however did not take this for granted: they denied that we can know whether there be body or not, and had no proper ground for admitting of the compulsion of phenomena. In fact they only stopped short when the absurdity of their position was shown by their application of it to practical life: but their arbitrary attempt to cut the knot by admitting a criterion in practice and excluding it in theory cannot be accepted. There are limits to Scepticism if it does not wish to destroy itself It was quite legitimate for Enesidemus to question the doctrine of Causality, but it was the reverse of legitimate to try to upset the doctrine of probation. Here we see the distinction between the Academy and the Pyrrhonists. Carneades and Cleitomachus were fond of using Logic for negative ends, yet they did not dream of denying Logic itself. The Sceptics do not appear to have seen that their supposed disproof of reasoning, if valid, disproved their own reasonings, if indeed we can allow those who did not allow of proof to talk of disproof. Sextus had a perfect right to pick to pieces the Stoic system of Logic, which he does with considerable skill. As he remarks, the Stoics confounded Concepts and Definitions together. The object defined is not apprehended from the Definition as the Stoic supposed, but the Concept is anterior to the Definition; and speaking of the absurd value the Stoics attach to definition, Sextus well asks, why people do not talk in definitions if they add so much to our information. He rightly points out that a Concept, which is a species, cannot be co-extensive with the Concept, which is its genus. Even when he assails the validity of the syllogism as a form, he is not going beyond what is admissible and has been sanctioned by many eminent names.

No amount of ingenuity in particulars can however atone for the inadequate conception the Pyrrhoneans formed of philosophy. Had they laid hold of the critical method adopted by Enesidemus in his eight tropes, they would have performed an inestimable service. This was an achievement greatly beyond what could be expected, and how far Enesidemus was before his followers, when he attained, although in this instance, only, to the critical instead of the sceptical method, is shown by the signal manner in which Sextus misunderstands the tropes. But it was not merely of an error of omission so venial as this that the Pyrrhoneans were guilty: they are open to a much graver charge. With all their ability and acuteness, and they possessed both in a large measure, they never comprehended the effects of their own work as a whole or rose above the notion of attempting the subversion of all established principles. It is curious to observe how complacently Sextus remarks on the tendency of such an endeavour; and apparently believes that, because he professes to be dealing only with phenomena, he is quite safe in cutting away the ground on which he himself stands. The New Academy on the other hand seems to me to have differed from the Pyrrhoneans most clearly, and especially in this point, that it did form a conception of philosophy as a whole. It regarded, I believe, the task of philosophy as purely formal—the classification of the representations made on the mind.

We have already seen that Carneades despaired of attaining to any certainty by physical investigations. There may be an Antipodes, the moon may be inhabited alone of the planetary bodies, the earth may be in motion: but he maintains, we have no means adequate to the solution of these questions. Again, we find both him and Arcesilas dwelling on the uncertainty of knowledge derived through the senses, and Carneades rejecting that also which is derived through what the Stoics termed the concepts of the Understanding.

In conjunction with this, one must consider the dislike Arcesilas expressed for the Megarean Eristic, his depreciation of Dialectic, and the saying of Carneades, that Dialectic was like a polypus that devoured its own limbs. At first all might lead us to class the Academy along with Pyrrho, and to believe that they both agreed in renouncing philosophy: especially would this be the case when we read the remarks of Carneades on the results derived from the reason, on the number of different sects, and the great problems which have been discussed and rediscussed, but which remain unsettled. This may be looked upon as an argument from despair, and indeed occurs several times in Sextus. Yet further reflection shows that it would be very extraordinary, if one so fond of controversy as Arcesilas, and who trained his pupils with a view to it, were altogether opposed to Eristic, if Carneades the renowned disputant, with whom few ventured to cross swords, altogether abandoned Dialectic, or, for the remembrance of Pyrrho’s fame in disputation might reconcile us to that, if Cleitomachus, who was by some called the founder of Dialectic philosophy, held such an opinion.

The solution of the difficulty is, I think, to be found in the Theory of Probability. I am not disposed to follow those who would identify the probable of the Academy with the Pyrrhonean phenomenon: the former is a much more scientific conception. It seems to me that in it lies, according to the Academy, the task of philosophy as a formal science: it is the supposed abuse only of Eristic and Dialectic that Arcesilas and Carneades would condemn, the attempt to make them a means of discovering the True: on the contrary, they regard the method of philosophy as a method of testing and classifying the concepts formed from the representations made to the mind: we cannot expect to reach to certainty: we can but register and compare concepts according to the standard of probability. It is easy to see that this doctrine is somewhat sterile and barren of result, but as a scientific Theory it is superior to Pyrrhonism, which with all its subtlety only rushes into a reductio ad absurdum. It is a pity that we do not know more of the constructive side of the philosophy of Carneades, for we do not exactly know how he established the Probable as a criterion while he denied the existence of Truth from the side of the Subjective. His destructive criticism has tended to obscure the other features of his system.

Thus, Pyrrhonists, allowing of no criterion and regarding every argument as equally true and equally false, arrived at results as fatal to themselves as to the dogmatists: the Academy, which had begun with the Socratic profession and the Socratic mode of examination, and employed the Pyrrhonean method merely as serviceable in assailing the Stoics and all who claimed absolute certitude, endeavoured, in Hume's language, "to resolve knowledge into probability." The accusation made by Sextus, that they dogmatically denied the possibility of knowledge, is untrue: perhaps their greatest error was their too ready adoption of the Pyrrhonean method, which inevitably led to consequences which they did not foresee, and would not have endorsed, and in their not seeing that the reasonings, used to support an alleged fact, are often false, while the fact alleged is true. Here lay the merit of Hume, whose scepticism is far more formidable to the experiential philosophers than theirs, and with whom they had much in common. What enhances the similarity is, that among the schools of the time they least of all regarded speculation as a means to an end. The Pyrrhonists were in this point at one with the Stoics and Epicureans: they professed absolute doubt only in order to arrive at undisturbed happiness. Carneades professed a moderated doubt and fixed upon no good as the highest, though his philosophy has throughout a reference to the Conduct of Life. It avoids that unattainable ideal which Pyrrhonism strove after, an ideal that though consonant to the tendencies of Pyrrho's age, seems to have little attraction for those who subsequently revived his doctrines.

From the number of physicians in their ranks one may believe that in the disorganized and unscientific state in which medicine was during the time immediately preceding Galen, the Pyrrhonean doubt appeared the only result practicable to the Empiric of the early empire. Sextus, however, belonged to the Methodici, and has tried to shew that the spirit of Pyrrhonism was antagonistic to the doctrines he himself opposed. Still he does not bring forward any grounds sufficient to upset the likelihood of a connection between the scepticism produced by the failure of philosophy and the failure of medicine.

From the late date at which both the Academy and the Pyrrhonists arose, they produced no dogmatic reaction. In an age when speculation was more vigorous, someone would probably have been stimulated to construct dogmatism anew in a more critical fashion, but the highest result they caused was the Stoicism of Chrysippus, which, in its turn, stimulated the ingenuity of Carneades. Their best efforts—the theories of Carneades and the critique of Causality and the eight Tropes of Enesidemus—provoked no adequate response.

The Neo-Platonists went back to Plato and Aristotle, and did not heed the revived doubt of their own day or the earlier polemic of the New Academy, but scepticism at least in the form given to it by Carneades still possessed much unobserved influence on those who had not joined either of what we may perhaps term the two rival camps of Neo-Platonism and Christianity. We may conjecture this from what St. Augustine says in his Retractations, and from the dialogue he wrote against the Academy, in which he discusses with his friends, Alypius, Licentius and Trigetius, the same problems that Cicero discusses with Lucullus. We find too St. Gregory of Nazianzus complaining of the troubles and confusions since the Sexti and Pyrrhoneans and the spirit of contradiction were perniciously intruded into our churches like some evil and malignant plague."

But the constructive tendencies of the age prevailed, and the whole philosophical energy of the fourth and fifth centuries were devoted to aims other than sceptical. It is curious however to observe that, when the revolt against authority, which marked the 16th and 17th centuries, brought scepticism in its train, while the Roman Church clung to Scholasticism and the Protestants to Aristotle, an attempt was made to found modern Scepticism on the old. Folcher wrote a history of the New Academy and Sorbifere translated the Hypotheses of Sextus: yet it is not in these imitators, but in Pascal and Hume, with all their likeness and all their unlikeness, that we must look for the true successors of Pyrrho and Carneades.





STOICS AND SCEPTICS





By





Edwyn Bevan





LECTURE I


ZENO AND THE STOA





THERE IS a scene familiar to our imaginations from childhood. We see a wandering Semitic teacher arraigned before the clever, inquisitive people of Athens. Somewhere in the background are the great Periclean buildings which crown the Acropolis. The Semite is declaring to the men of Athens that the Deity dwells not in temples made with hands, is not confined in His dealings to one race, but is the Father of all mankind—an atmosphere, as it were, in which they live and move about and exist, without any such material shape as can be portrayed in metal or stone, the work of human art.

About 350 years before Paul of Tarsus passed through Athens, another Semitic teacher, coming from a country close to Cilicia—from Cyprus, and from a city which, like Tarsus, was an old Oriental city penetrated by Hellenism—had gone about among the people of Athens, as clever and inquisitive in that age as in the days of Paul, and had declared to them that the Deity was One Power, pervading the Universe, and dwelling in all men everywhere, without distinction of race, and that in the ideal city there would be no temples, because no temple, the work of builders and artificers, could be worthy of God.

It is a remarkable case of history repeating itself — the same background and so great similarity between the actors three and a half centuries apart. Of course the resemblance between Zeno, the Hellenized Phoenician of Citium, and Paul, the Hellenized Hebrew of Tarsus, is not purely accidental. The author of the Acts has assuredly put into the mouth of his Paul, with deliberate purpose, phrases characteristic of the teaching which went back to Zeno. Nor is the connection made by the writer an arbitrary one; it is the index of a great fact — the actual connection in history between Stoicism and Christianity. Looking back, we can see more fully than was possible at the moment when the Acts was written, to what an extent the Stoic teaching had prepared the ground in the Mediterranean lands for the Christian, what large elements of the Stoic tradition were destined to be taken up into Christianity.

It remains, all the same, something of a strange coincidence that the founder of Stoicism should have come of a race whose language was almost identical with Hebrew, and from a Greek-Oriental city so near to Tarsus. The connection of Stoicism with that region was always a close one. Chrysippus, the Second Founder of Stoicism, as he has been called, came from Cilicia, and his successor, another Zeno, from Tarsus itself. When Paul lived in Tarsus, as a young man, it was still one of the chief seats of the Stoic philosophy.

Citium in Cyprus, the native place of Zeno, had a population which was largely Phoenician in blood. It was ruled by a dynasty of Phoenician petty kings, whose names figure in the Punic inscriptions found on the spot From 361 to 312 B.C., within which period the first twenty years of Zeno's life probably fall, its king was Pumi-yathon the son of Milk-yathon the son of Baal-ram. That Zeno himself was a Phoenician is implied, I think, in our records. Timon the satirist depicts him as an old Phoenician woman. When the charge was brought against him of stealing the doctrines of other schools, his enemies were apt to add ‘like a Phoenician.’ A group of shrewd Semitic families domiciled in Citium, and doing business round the shores of the Levant—such, we may divine, was the milieu whence Zeno came in his youth to fourth-century Athens. It is impossible to harmonize all the stories current in the later tradition about his conversion to philosophy; but one may take as historical, I suppose, the assertion that he first came to Athens on some mercantile enterprise—bringing a cargo of purple from Phoenicia, says one account. At Athens a new world opens for the young man; people here are talking about things larger than commercial gain and loss, and we are shown Zeno going ardently from one philosophic school to another. The atmosphere of Athens at that moment is alive with the philosophic movement initiated a few generations before by Socrates. Plato has probably been dead only some thirty years; and the impression of his personality is still preserved by men who knew the Master's living presence. The rivalry between the different schools keeps discussion keen. And Zeno seems to have given them all a hearing—Crates the Cynic, Stilpo the Megarian, the successors of Plato in the Academy. At last he came to feel that he himself had a message to deliver, and we are shown him walking up and down the Painted Porch, arguing energetically and somewhat annoyed at the people who impeded his progress. He is reported on one occasion to have pointed to the wooden basis of an altar which was visible at the extremity of the Stoa and said, “This once stood in the middle of the Stoa; it was removed out there, because it got in people's way; please apply the principle to yourselves.”

Zeno made Athens his second home: he lived there as a metoikos to a good old age; but he felt a bond of piety still tie him, we are told, to the old city in Cyprus whence he had come; when his name was put up in some public inscription at Athens as Zeno the philosopher, they added ‘of Citium’ at his own request. He felt that his duty to Citium made it incumbent upon him to refuse the citizenship which Athens was ready to bestow. Of the books which he wrote nothing survives but the titles and a few detached phrases; our knowledge of his life is confined to a number of miscellaneous anecdotes, in which the inventiveness of the Athenian story-tellers may have had a part impossible now to check. Yet even an invented story will probably have been ben trovato, and through our fragmentary record we may still, I think, get the impression of a real man. The Stoic tradition, which counted for so much in the world of later antiquity, was like other movements of the human spirit in this also: although its development and success can be in large measure accounted for by the conditions of the time, by the receptiveness of the world at that particular moment for that particular thing, still it owed its first impulse not to any conjunction of impersonal causes, but to a human person of singular individuality and force.

It is obvious that Zeno in the later part of his life was one of the considerable figures at Athens, a man to whom the city as a whole turned in political emergencies, to whom kings like Antigonus and Ptolemy paid court. Something un-Hellenic there must have been in his appearance to the end, an Asiatic darkness of skin, a long, straggling, ungainly body, noticeable among men who had been shaped from youth up by the exercises of the gymnasium. Among all the Greek teachers it was the Cynics whom he had found most congenial, the men who had set themselves rudely against all that adornment and amenity of life which went with the Hellenic spirit, and had proclaimed every distinction between man and man conventional and worthless. In a society where pleasure was pursued with artistic elaborations and refinements, there was something bare and gaunt - was it something impressively plain? - in the life of the man whose food was so spare that the comedians said he taught his disciples to be hungry, and who seemed to have no use for the services of slaves. ‘More self-restrained than Zeno’ became a proverbial phrase in Athens. But it was rather the reduction of life to a homely simplicity than any set mortification of the flesh, for Zeno was ready to grow genial over the wine-cups, observing that there was a bitter sort of beans which became pleasant when moistened.

From some of the little characteristics recorded of him we may, I think, realize his individuality. He had learned from the Cynics a bluntness of speech which outraged polite convention. And he delivered himself with a dogmatic conviction, having a peculiar way of throwing his assertions into the form of short compact arguments, of hard syllogisms, which gave them an appearance of mathematical certainty. “If it is reasonable to honour the gods: it would not be reasonable to honour beings which did not exist: therefore the gods exist.” Nothing destitute of consciousness and reason can produce out of itself beings endowed with consciousness and reason: the Universe produces beings endowed with consciousness and reason: therefore the Universe is itself not destitute of consciousness and reason. He used the Greek language with little regard for Attic sensibilities—whether because he had never quite acquired the fine instinct of a native or because he scorned grace of speech—forcing strange new terms to carry the thoughts which had somehow to be uttered. One thinks of Carlyle, only this was a Carlyle with concentration instead of diffuseness. His huge earnestness expressed itself in vigorous gesture. We are told how he used to illustrate the katallptike phantasia the impression which gets a grasp on reality, by clenching his fist.

It is impossible to give such an account of Stoicism as shall separate clearly the teaching of the founder from later developments, because any characteristic of the Stoic tradition was apt to be loosely ascribed to Zeno, and we cannot now disentangle the original teaching from the new elements incorporated with it by his successors, especially by the great persevering systematizer, Chrysippus.

The titles of Zeno's works cover a wide field—metaphysics, logic, physics, ethics, rhetoric—and this implies a solid body of positive doctrine to which the later teaching upon a large number of cardinal points must have remained tied down. But one knows how a difference of emphasis, of tone, may utterly change any statement, and one may suspect that Stoicism, seen, as we must see it, through the somewhat pedantic medium of Chrysippus, is not quite what it would appear to us, if we could recover the writings of the founder and understand in what context of thought and emotion those phrases were first flung forth, out of which the well-known Stoic paradoxes were framed. We must be content, as it is, to take the Stoic teaching in the form in which it issued from the laboratory of Chrysippus, as a whole, without hoping to distinguish, except very conjecturally, what it was at its first beginning, with Zeno, with Cleanthes.

There is one question about it which naturally suggests itself at the outset, and which has been repeatedly asked: Was the teaching of Zeno a pure development of Hellenic philosophy, or did it owe elements to his Phoenician home? Those who maintain that the philosophy of Zeno was purely Hellenic can no doubt show how each part of it was connected with the previous philosophic tradition in Greece, and according to the stories, of course, the impulse which turned the young merchant into a philosopher came not from his home influences, but from the Athenian schools. Everybody would nevertheless admit some new and distinctive element in Zeno's teaching, and it may be asked whether this distinctive element had affinities with Eastern lore. Personally, I do not think that the question can ever be answered, for the simple reason that we do not know anything about the wisdom of the Phoenicians. It is idle to discuss whether a child resembles its mother, if there is no means of finding out what the mother was like.

Men indeed had thought about life and written books for centuries in the Nearer East: we have Babylonian and Assyrian clay-tablets, we have numerous sacred writings of the Hebrews; and this may be enough to enable the people who operate with the vague and unserviceable concept of ( Oriental' to theorize confidently about a non-Hellenic element in Stoicism. It would, however, be most unsafe to deduce the prevalent conceptions among the Phoenicians in the fourth century B.C. from the fragments of cuneiform writings; and the Hebrews, we know, felt themselves in many ways the antithesis of the surrounding peoples. That the Phoenicians had a traditional wisdom of their own is indeed probable; such Wisdom literature as is exemplified among the Hebrews by the Book of Proverbs or Job may have had parallels among the Northern Semites. But it would not be wise to build much upon such a mere possibility.

But if we are unable to show that the matter of Zeno's teaching owed anything to a Semitic tradition, we may, I think, see something in the manner of it which makes Zeno differ from the established type of Greek philosopher by an approximation to the Eastern prophet. Or perhaps one should not say Eastern prophet, because the Greek philosopher was a peculiar product of Hellenism within the last two or three centuries, and the other, the prophetic type of teacher, was found generally among mankind outside the Hellenic sphere, even to some extent within it, if we may take Pythagoras, for instance, or Empedocles as an example. One only calls the type Eastern because in the Near East it remained the standard type of teacher, whereas it was superseded in Hellenism by the philosopher. The prophets are those, to quote Seeley's description in Ecce Homo, who have seemed to themselves to discover truth, not so much by a process of reasoning as by an intense gaze, and who have announced their conclusions in the voice of a herald, using the name of God and giving no reasons.' The Greek type of philosopher had reached its completion in Socrates and Plato with their eironeia, their apparent tentativeness of assertion, their placing themselves on a common footing with their hearers. Plato characteristically represented the discovery of truth not as a process in which one proclaimed and the other believed, but as a conversation in which truth, latent in the mind, was elicited by rational argument.

This is the very opposite of the prophet's Thus saith the Lord. The prophet and philosopher speak in quite different tones of voice. Now the curious thing about Zeno, it seems to me, is that while his message was Hellenic, his tone of voice was that of the prophet. He had something positive to say, something he wished men to believe, and he conformed to the Hellenic requirements in throwing his message, as we have seen, into the form of brief syllogistic arguments. But one has only to look at those laconic, clenched syllogisms to see that they have by themselves no cogency. They were merely a vehicle for the intense convictions of the teacher. His teaching was-essentially dogmatic, authoritative. He named Reason, yes: but in what manner? One might perhaps express the singular combination of manner and matter in his message by saying that its burden was ‘Thus saith Reason'.

If men received it, it was not because they were convinced in a cold intellectual way, but because behind his affirmations there was a tremendous personal force, because something deep in their own hearts rose up to bear witness to the things he affirmed. It was the way of faith.

We cannot make Zeno himself responsible for the great scholastic system framed by Chrysippus, for all the dogmas and paradoxes which were part of the stereotyped Stoic doctrine later on, but we have every reason to believe that the peculiar features which distinguished Stoicism were due to Zeno, and that the founder's teaching was essentially dogmatic and paradoxical. It seems to me a mistake when, in order to accommodate it to our ways of thinking, its peculiarities are minimized and its characteristics toned down, as if what it meant were really something quite ordinary and common sense. I think it really meant something violent: only its violence may be sympathetically construed, if we understand the urgency which lay upon it. Dogma in our days suggests an unnecessary intellectual garment which trammels and incommodes the mind: we hardly realize the bitter need for dogma felt by minds which have been stripped shivering naked. We must consider at what a moment in the history of ancient civilization Zeno of Citium appeared.

The culture of the Greeks was a development of the last two or three centuries only. Mankind had been many thousands of years on the earth, and for the last few thousand years there had been great civilizations, with arts and literatures and laws. But in these last ten generations, with the Hellenes, a new thing had come to exist, or rather a quality in human nature had been developed to an effectiveness and power never known before—the quality which we describe as Rationalism, The ancestors of the Hellenes, like the rest of mankind, had lived in societies each of which maintained a firm tradition for its members as to the powers operative in the world and as to the binding rules of conduct. To say that every individual had accepted, as a matter of course, the view of the world and the rules of conduct prevalent in his society would be too much; for there had always, no doubt, been individuals who questioned points in the tradition and opposed or evaded particular rules. But among the Greeks such questioning had come to be systematic and extensive; it was not the case of an individual revolting, but of a new tradition of free inquiry growing up in the midst of the society, a recognition of Reason as superseding tradition in all departments of life, a clearer distinction between the real facts of the world and the work of human imagination than had ever been made before. It had begun, of course, with a few eager spirits, and the new ferment had been confined at first to little groups of inquirers and disciples, but with the Sophistic movement in the fifth century B.C. it had run everywhere through the Greek world. You know how that made everything seem in flux, everything uncertain. Even the ordinary man in fifth-century Athens became aware that clever people no longer believed in his old gods and his old standards of right and wrong. And in the time of Zeno, scepticism was not only an abstract theory. Those were the days of the Greek conquest of the East, when the individual adventurer was finding larger and larger scope; there was plenty of the practical scepticism of the man who had no pretensions to being a philosopher, but only knew that he could follow his egoistic will without troubling himself about the gods. Socrates, indeed, and Plato had seemed to lay in the midst of this confusion the foundation for new positive knowledge and morality. But one must not suppose that the Socratic schools had put an end to the Sophistic unrest. To meet a wide popular need, Platonism was too fine-drawn, too abstruse, too tentative. Such a general break-up of tradition was one of the things which this new Rationalism in the Greek world had brought about. The situation was one which no human society, I think we may say, had before in the world's history been called upon to face.

We must consider that the tradition which in old days had enclosed each individual from his birth up, fashioning his ideas of the world, giving him fixed rules for conduct, had supplied a need. And the need remained. It was not merely that the explanation of the world contained in the old mythology had been found absurd, and that man was left confronted with an unsolved enigma. That might in itself be unpleasant; man has a disinterested curiosity; and an unsolved enigma means intellectual discomfort. But man might have put up with that and acquiesced in agnosticism, if the problem had been stationary, simply to understand what the world is here and now.

It was Time which made the poignancy of the need. The reality with which men were confronted was a moving one; they were being carried onward, each one into a future of unknown possibilities, and whatever might lie on the other side of death, the possibilities on the hither side were disquieting enough in the fourth century B.C. Even in our firmly ordered and peaceful society, hideous accidents may befall the individual; but in those days, when the world showed only despotic monarchies and warring city-states, one must remember that slavery and torture were contingencies which no one could be sure that the future did not contain for him. Now the old tradition had made man feel that this movement, in which he was borne along, was subject to the will of beings kindred to himself. The gods might be envious and vindictive, but there was a mind and heart there to appeal to, not altogether unlike the human—there was something with which man might establish friendly relations and be at peace. If all that faded into an empty dream, man found himself left naked to fortune. With the mass, of passionate desires and loves he carried in his heart, the unknown chances of the future meant ever-present fear. Unless he could find his good and possess it in such a way that no conceivable horror which might spring upon him out of that Unknown could touch it, fear must be always there, in the background of his thoughts. This Fear, as we shall see, was one of the constituents of human misery specially noted in the Stoic school, one of the things from which Zeno promised deliverance.

But it was something more than relative security in looking forward into the future which the old tradition had afforded. Besides giving a certain view of the world, it had given rules of conduct, standards of behaviour. And the most imperative reason why man could not simply discard the old tradition and remain contentedly agnostic is found here. It was not only that the reality confronting him was in movement, and that the possibilities of the future for himself made him fearful. This fear, even if a worse agony than mere intellectual discomfort before an unsolved enigma, might have been borne perforce, if man had been simply passive.

The important thing was that man was not the passive spectator of a process: he did not only look at Reality; he helped to make it. He was compelled, whether he wished or not, to act, each fresh minute of his conscious life. And his voluntary action could not be other than purposive: that is to say, in making new Reality, he was obliged to have regard not only to what existed already, but to what ought to exist, to Values, to Good. Every voluntary action implies a value-judgement. The old tradition gave each individual a body of value-judgements in all that the social code called good. And besides stamping certain sorts of behaviour as good in themselves, good in the sense of praiseworthy, the old tradition had coupled extrinsically the goods which were the common objects of human desire—pleasure, health, riches, and so on—with the conduct which it approved, by representing the gods as interested in such conduct and as dispensing rewards. The individual had therefore a fairly complete guide for life. But now that all the traditional canons of conduct had been challenged, and the gods had become a doubtful fable, the question what it was good for a man to do clamoured to be answered. The passionate desires and loves which man carried in his heart created indeed values by which the action of mankind, as Zeno looked at it, was everywhere determined. But the result was not happiness. Mankind seemed to be driven hither and thither in a sea of contrary desires; one impulse overrode and frustrated another; the things which men took for good brought them no satisfaction when they were gained; human life was a chaos, in which blind Desire was the propelling force, and action was spasmodic, furious, vain—a misery of craving for ever disappointed and for ever renewed.

This blind Desire was the other great constituent, besides the Fear, in that human misery which the gospel of Zeno claimed to meet. And the two so worked together that a remedy for one would cure the other. For if Zeno was able to put man in possession of a good, secure from all the chances of the morrow, then the desire of man need be directed to nothing beyond it. There was no place for either Desire or Fear any more.

It was such a good which Stoicism bade men see within their reach. Zeno asked in effect what happiness really was, and he found it—this is the essential point— not in a particular sort of sensation or sum of sensations, as men were apt to suppose, but in an attitude of the Will. A man is happy when what he wills exists. It was in terms of Will that Value was to be interpreted; when Zeno said that this or that was a good, he meant this or that leaves the Will satisfied. I am happy, when I do not want things to be any other than they are. Among the things present to my consciousness may be a painful sensation; but it is not an evil for me, if it is what I myself will. One may, I think, take as an illustration the painful effort which is felt in athletic exercise; the ache of the muscle is in itself unpleasant, and yet it does not detract from the man's happiness in the moment of his activity; he would not wish it away. Happiness is the correspondence of what exists with the Will, and men whose wills were in bondage to desire tried to find it by shaping outside circumstances according to their desires. This put them at the mercy of fortune and made them slaves to fear. Suppose we brought about the correspondence in another way, by willing what exists?

Then, Zeno said, we have a happiness which sets a man free, makes him independent in face of the storms of fortune, extinguishes desire and fear. He feels pain no less than before as an unpleasant sensation, but it is not an evil for him any more, because the attitude of his will towards it is changed. The agony of the rack, of disease, he will feel as the athlete feels his self-chosen effort: he would not have it otherwise. There is the story of Posidonius, the great Stoic of the days of Cicero, receiving a visit from Pompey in Rhodes, whilst suffering from a painful disease. At every fresh spasm which interrupted the conversation, he cried out: Do your worst, pain, do your worst: you will never compel me to acknowledge that you are an evil!' —somewhat theatrical, perhaps, but a true declaration of the Stoic principle.

I think one must concede to Zeno that if this adjustment of the Will were carried out, it would do away with fear and entail absolute independence of circumstances. And has one any right to dismiss it straightaway as a psychological impossibility? Is it not true that our wills are ours, we know not how? And is it not true that we do sometimes will the painful? And if we can will the painful in the case of athletic exercise, is it unreasonable to think that we might with determination and practice enlarge our faculty for doing so, even to the point of willing all conceivable pains which might befall us? This aspect of the Stoic doctrine has been put forcibly by Heinrich Gomperz in his book Die Lebensauffassungder griechischen Philosophen. Gomperz only regrets that the Stoics coupled their doctrine of redemption by adjustment of the Will with statements about the nature of the Universe. Their doctrine of redemption, he seems to think, stood strong on its own ground and was only weakened by dogmatic assertions at which the modern agnostic man must naturally shy. I do not know whether this is a view which commends itself to you. Personally I quite understand that if you are a convinced agnostic, you will have no more use for the Stoic dogma than for any other. Only I do not see that without such dogma the Stoic precept can be urged with any reason. Why should I adjust my will to what happens? Why should I refuse to consider any pain that comes to me an evil? The Stoic had an answer ready: Because everything that happens is determined by the sovereign Reason. If you discard the Stoic belief in the Rational Purpose controlling the course of the world, I cannot see why you should call everything that happens to you good. If the power governing the Universe is represented as an arbitrary Personal Will, one feels that the attitude of Mill, refusing to call good what is not good— ‘To hell I will go’—is more honourable than a servile acquiescence. And I do not see that the attitude of acquiescence becomes any more honourable, if the Universe is driven by blind impersonal forces. It may be more prudent not to struggle, but it seems a poor sort of freedom that is won by an acted fiction.

Zeno at any rate felt that his injunction to men to adjust their wills to the course of the world could only be reasonably given, if the world were of a certain character. His doctrine, like that of the later Greek philosophical schools in general, was elaborated rather to meet a practical need than to satisfy speculative curiosity. But he was just as aware as his contemporary Epicurus that you cannot have ethical doctrine without a basis of physical and metaphysical doctrine; you can have no rule of conduct without some view of the universe wherein the action is to take place. He was therefore compelled to provide an answer to those physical and metaphysical problems which had been agitating Greek thought. He had to take the whole field of Greek intellectual interests into his scope—on Logic, on Rhetoric even, he had to lay down clear principles. In a system of this kind, made under such pressure, we must expect to find that a good deal is put in simply to support the vital points, to join them up and make the system complete.

And it seems to me that if we are to appreciate the Stoic system intelligently, we must distinguish the points to which real importance was attached, the things about which the constructors really cared, from what one may call stop-gap theory. One of the reasons, I think, which often make accounts of Stoicism dull is that a painstaking student has drawn the Stoic doctrines one by one from the literary sources and put them together in methodical order, as if they were all of one quality. Of course, the moment you try to go deeper and understand what were the driving forces in the construction, to distinguish the points about which the teachers cared from the supporting theory, you are on much more conjectural ground. You run the risk of following subjective fancies. But it seems that this risk must be run in all vital interpretations of human work. If you are determined to limit yourself to what is called objective fact, you certainly diminish the chances of your making mistakes, but you also renounce all your chances of getting below the surface. What, for instance, is mainly interesting, to my mind, in the physical theories of Zeno, is not their detail, but the fact that he felt it necessary to enunciate a theory of Nature at all. We cannot understand what he was about unless we realize the necessity which was on him to give a complete answer to the enigma of the Universe, compact in all its parts, since nothing which left any room for doubt to get in could give a bewildered world security and guidance.

Stoicism, as it appears to me, was a system put together hastily, violently, to meet a desperate emergency. Some ring-wall must be built against chaos. High over the place where Zeno talked could be descried the wall, built generations before, under the terror of a Persian attack, built in haste of the materials which lay to hand, the drums of columns fitted together, just as they were, with the more regular stones. That heroic wall still looks over the roofs of modern Athens. To Zeno it might have been a parable of his own teaching.

Even the passion of the Stoics for definition may in this way be regarded with human sympathy. It began with Zeno himself, who established numerous brief formulae as fixed and canonical definitions in the school tradition. Short definitions of this kind were well adapted to become current coin of all the philosophic schools and even of the market-place. As a matter of fact the Stoic definitions had a wide circulation in later antiquity. It is always the catch-words of a philosophical theory which lay hold of the general mind. Stoicism issued its own catch-words, one might say, with the official stamp. One of Zeno's disciples, Sphaerus, seems to have shown a special aptitude for their manufacture. One is at first inclined to treat all this as a kind of dry philosophical pedantry. Perhaps with Chrysippus and the later Stoics such a vice of the mind was not altogether absent. But I think the motive behind it does take on another, and even a pathetic, aspect, when we consider the necessity to have a cut-and-dried answer ready to every question, if a coherent dogmatic system was to be fitted out such as the ordinary man could grasp, and consider also the bitter need for such a system which the world felt at that time.



THE THREE PARTS OF PHILOSOPHY



We have seen then two of the parts of which Zeno's teaching must necessarily consist—the part which gave direction for conduct, the Ethical part, and the part which gave a theory of the Universe, described in the technical language of the schools as the Physical part. Physics, you will notice, in this extended sense includes Theology. But there was yet a third part—or rather a first and preliminary part—indispensable to the whole. There was the initial difficulty which confronted any and every dogmatic philosophy, the scepticism which had become general in the Greek schools with the activity of speculation and the Sophistic movement. Men were apt to doubt, not only a particular statement as to the nature of the Universe, but whether data existed for making any statement at all. It was especially sense-perception of all kinds which rational criticism had shown fallacious: the delusions of sight and hearing had been urged in such a way that the ordinary man was coming to despair of all knowledge; all we have power to see is a straight staff bent in a pool. Even Plato had agreed with the Sophists in throwing over sense-perception as almost worthless; it is true that he had held out in its place the hope of attaining knowledge by pure Reason, but he had not, as we saw, put forth any body of positive doctrine likely to be popular. The Platonic Ideas the ordinary man would find something insubstantial. All this compelled one who came forward, like Zeno, as a dogmatic teacher, to comprise in his philosophy a theory of knowledge; he must be able to give a clear account of the processes of mind by which we acquire knowledge and utter it when it is acquired. This constituted the first part in Zeno's philosophy, the Logical part as it was called.

Each of the three parts of the Stoic doctrine, the Logical, the Physical, and the Ethical, had its special stumbling-block, a point upon which the hostile critics of antiquity directed their attack. In the Logical part the stumbling-block was the Stoic doctrine of certainty. We could not talk about certainty at all, Zeno may have reasoned, unless we knew in reference to something what certainty meant. There must be something I am sure of to give me my standard. He felt prepared to go even farther, to assert that even in the discredited field of sense-perception we had some certain knowledge. It was all very well for the Sophists to talk about the deceptiveness of the senses, and, of course, we were deceived sometimes ; but Zeno, as a plain, honest man, felt it absurd to use these occasional delusions to invalidate sense-perceptions wholesale. In each of these particular cases, if we looked close, we should find some special circumstance which made the perception an abnormal one, such as the watery medium making the straight staff look bent; it is not fair to take it as an instance of normal seeing. We have impressions, as a matter of fact, of whose truth we are quite sure. There are things which come home to us with such distinctness that to doubt is a physical impossibility. The impression, in a phrase which assuredly goes back to Zeno himself, takes hold of us by the hair and drags us to assent.'

Zeno taught, receives impressions as wax receives the impress of the seal. It is hardly credible that the metaphor was received quite literally in the Stoic school, even before Chrysippus definitely explained it as figurative. The impressions, Zeno continued, differ from each other in clearness and sharpness of outline. Some are not clear enough to afford certainty as to the objects whence they come. There is another sort characterized by grasping, comprehension. We come here to the kataleptike phantasia which held so prominent a place in Stoic doctrine, the impression which leaves no room for doubt. Out of such phantasia all real knowledge is built up. We may note at this point, need not necessarily be a sense-impression; it may also be the apprehension of a truth logically deduced from indubitable premises. In either case, such a phantasia is true to objective fact and possessed of convincing force. The ideal Wise Man is characterized on the intellectual side by the sureness with which he distinguishes ‘grasping impressions’ from ambiguous ones. He is not omniscient, but he is incapable of making a mistake.

Zeno's theory of knowledge is, of course, a naive one. Certain truths were, I think, working in it. It is true surely that there must be some things we know in order to make it possible for the problem of knowledge to be raised at all. And we must, I suppose, allow that all our knowledge of matters of fact must take its start from concrete experiences which include an element of bodily sensation. And if we call the straight staff bent in a pool, to take the favourite Sophistic instance we have already referred to, a fallacious appearance, this means that we contrast it with other appearances of the staff to sight and touch, which are more stable and coherent. It is only because part of our sense-experience seems relatively trustworthy, that we discover the deceitfulness of other parts. And among the qualities by which in actual life we distinguish true sense-experience from fallacious, a clearness and definiteness of character, the Stoic is unquestionably one. We may also grant to Zeno that a perfectly judicious man would never make a mistake.

For the Stoic did not apparently mean that he would never adopt an erroneous working hypothesis: only when he did so, he would be fully aware of its hypothetical character, and would therefore make no mental assertion which would be stultified by the event. A crucial case was the trick played by King Ptolemy upon Zeno's disciple Sphaerus, in presenting him at a banquet with a pomegranate of wax. When the philosopher tried to eat it, Ptolemy asked him mockingly whether he had not assented to a false impression. No, Sphaerus answered, he had merely assented to the probability that the fruit offered him by King Ptolemy was a real one. The Wise Man's assent would never be given to anything but a kataleptike phantasia. Only in order that an impression might be kataleptike it must be clear and complete enough to exclude all interpretations but one; only one theory as to its origin must be logically possible.

Now we must admit that if there were any mind judicious to the degree of perfection, it would recognize exactly how much the data before it proved, and if there were any impressions of which only one theory was possible, it would embrace that theory with absolute certainty. Wherever—this is Zeno's point—any one makes a mistake, gives away his full belief to something untrue, we can always find that his judiciousness, and not the data, has been at fault; the data did not compel him to his belief; they left an alternative open of which he omitted to take account. The Stoic school allowed that in the case of a large number of impressions alternatives were left open; wisdom then consisted simply in recognizing them, in withholding assent; the Wise Man would in practice follow the probable, knowing it to be probable only. In reference therefore to these the doctrine of the Stoics did not differ from that of the sceptical Academy; both enjoined the same suspense of judgement. Only the Academy taught that no impressions existed which did not leave alternatives open. The Stoics maintained that some impressions there were which could be grasped, upon which the Wise Man could rest the weight of his full belief and upon which he could build a system of certain knowledge.

The general proposition that human experience furnishes some data upon which we can rely as true must be admitted by every one who does not deny the existence of knowledge altogether. When we go on to ask what these data are, the real difficulties begin. This is where the naiveté, the crudity of the Stoic epistemology becomes apparent. Zeno seems to have distinguished ‘grasping impressions’ from ambiguous ones only in the most rough-and-ready fashion. He confounded the feeling of assurance, the psychological fact, with logical justification. To say that there were impressions which we could not help believing was really no answer to the critical question, What ought we to believe?

Zeno probably never understood the real meaning of the sceptical inquiry. His motive was not speculative but practical. Dialectic had value for him simply as a means for beating down the objections raised against any dogmatic system at the threshold. If an opponent could show that no perceptions yielded certain knowledge, the claims of the dogmatic teacher collapsed at once. To establish therefore the bare general truth that some indubitable perceptions, some katateptlkai phantasiai, existed was itself to clear the ground. We can understand perhaps the impatience with which Zeno brushed aside the cobwebs of the Sceptics, as an offence to the healthy human understanding, by looking at the line taken by Epictetus in the matter. Epictetus assuredly only reproduced in this point the temper which the Stoic school had inherited from its founder. Zeno overbore the sceptical arguments by the drive of his positive conviction. The purport of all his logical theory was to give men courage to embrace with full assurance the Truth which he had come to proclaim concerning Nature and God and Man.

What then was the Truth according to Zeno? We discover in the department of Physics no less than in that of Logic a practical rather than a speculative interest as the determining motive in Stoicism. It was not that Zeno addressed himself to the Universe with a pure disinterested curiosity to know the truth of things for the sake of knowing, but he wanted to make sure of such things about it as should justify a certain emotional and volitional attitude in men. The whole of the Stoic Physics was directed to showing that the Power operative in the Universe was rational: all its theory of the constitution of the material world and the course of its movement led up to that crowning result. The actual detail of the Stoic cosmogony, so far as we can recover it, does not contain anything very original or interesting. Zeno seems to have done little more than take over the tradition of the old Ionian philosophers.

Their conception of Nature had been, as is well known, the one described as Hylozoism. They thought, that is, of the Reality underlying the changing manifold of the sensible world as a Physis, a material stuff, which had the characteristics of life. Heraclitus seems to have identified this stuff, described, of course, as fire, with Logos, Reason, the orderly Law which governed the process of unending change. To us the metaphysical grossness of identifying Consciousness, or any element in Consciousness, with a material substance is so obvious that it is difficult for us to transport ourselves into a phase of thought when such confusion was possible. And when Zeno came to Athens, there had already been Plato to lay stress upon the incorporeal character of the Soul and of the world of Ideas. But the Phoenician did not find satisfaction in concepts so impalpable; he harked back to the older Ionian doctrine. For him too the whole Universe was only one Substance, one Physis, in various states, and that one substance was Reason, was God. He seems to have stated that God and the Soul were bodies, as emphatically as the Platonists stated that they were unbodily. This was the great stumbling-block of Stoicism in the department of Physics.

Zeno was determined all through, as has been said, by a practical motive, and when he said ‘God is Body,’ what we may discern is, I think, his repugnance to any teaching which would dissolve God into an abstract idea; it was the crude expression of an intense conviction that God was real, was concrete. We must remember too that Platonism had banished God from the material world, had left it a dark mass from which the Soul must detach itself if it would find Him, and yet this is the world which encloses us on every side, with which we have primarily to do. Zeno came, as it were, to men asking where they could find God and struck his hand upon the solid earth and answered ‘Here.’ There was nothing which was not, in its ultimate origin, God; it was He in whom man lived and moved and had his being.



MATERIALISM AND PANTHEISM



Zeno taught that God is Body, but it was not a dead stuff which constituted the world. The thing which Zeno was concerned above all others to affirm was that this stuff was actually Reason. The Universe is a living being; that was the fundamental formula of Stoic Physics. Nothing could be farther from what is understood by Materialism in modern times. The essential point of that is to deny rational purpose in the primary laws governing the world: one state of matter passes into another according to uniformities which leave no room for purpose, which could be stated as a rigid mathematical equation, if we only knew enough. Zeno's essential point, on the other hand, is the identification of the material Physis with Reason. This identification is certainly a clumsiness of thought, but it is misleading to speak of the gross Materialism of Stoicism in the same sense in which we call modern Materialism gross. For what really signifies is whether the Universe is or is not directed by rational purpose. The Materialism of Zeno was refined from the moral and practical point of view by the very metaphysical grossness which endued matter with the characteristics of spirit.

The difficulty which immediately confronts all Pantheism is, of course, the choice between making all the Universe equally God and so emptying the idea of God of all meaning, and on the other hand recognizing distinctions of more or less divine, which is hard to do if we have begun by declaring that everything which exists is indistinguishably God. Zeno chose the latter alternative. When he spoke of God or Reason as governing the world, he implied the existence of something other than God, something which is governed, passive to God's active. There it was, all this inert matter, which we see and handle and lift and push. And he explained that God in His proper being, in the state which realized all His potentiality, was not the whole of matter but the finest part of it. He described this part, following Heraclitus, as a fire, or as a fiery ether, more subtle than the common air and fire we know. This fiery ether was identical with pure Reason. Somehow part of the fire had got condensed and heavy and lost its divinity. Zeno gave an account, modelled on the old Ionian physics, of how this world came about, how part of the divine fire became depotentiated and changed into the grosser elements, the common fire which burns, air, water, and earth.

Part, however, of the original fiery ether retained its proper form, and this constituted the active power in the Universe, whilst the rest was the passive material upon which it acted. All round the world was an envelope of the fiery ether, pure and unmixed, but it also penetrated the whole mass, as its soul. The orderly working of Nature was its operation: organic beings grew according to regular types, because the Divine Reason was in them as a logos spermatikos, a formula of life developing from a germ. Even upon earth some of the divine fire retained its pure essence—the reasonable souls, each one a particle of fiery ether, which dwelt in the hearts of men.

I say nothing here about the doctrine of TOVOS, because I do not understand it. It is not clear to me that TOVOS in this connection meant 'tension,' or that it was so prominent a part of the Stoic physics as modern books make out.

It was to a Universe so conceived that Stoicism bade men surrender their wills. Every movement in the world was as much the expression of a Supreme Purpose as the voluntary movements of an animal were of its individual purpose. Chance had no place in the close-knit process which might be called Fate or Destiny, but which was really Intelligent Law and all-pervading Providence. It was for the faith in Providence above all else that the Stoic stood in the ancient world.





LECTURE II


THE STOA (continued)





WE SAW in our previous lecture how the decay of the old traditional beliefs, of the old traditional rules of conduct, had left a great part of Greek society at the beginning of the third century B.C. without a fixed guide for life. The question ‘What is good for the sons of men which they should do under the heaven all the days of their life?' was a question which faced many individuals in those days of adventure and movement, and a question which many answered by blind impulse and at haphazard. It was at such a moment that a teaching began to go out into the world with the promise of tranquillity and guidance, the teaching first expounded by Zeno of Citium in the Painted Porch at Athens. We saw in our previous lecture how Zeno had shown men a way of escape from Fear and Desire by the adjustment of their wills to everything which the course of the world brought upon them, and how he could bid them to adjust their wills because the course of the world was in every detail governed by the same Divine Reason that dwelt in their own breasts.

Reason? Yes, but what did this mean? This surely is just one of the points where Stoicism, in its haste to construct a dogmatic system for popular use, stops short with a vague and unanalysed concept.



WHAT DOES REASON MEAN?



Reason was a term taken up from current phraseology, a term which people felt they understood, and which gave them a happy sense of security, but which meant much or little according to the context. It meant sometimes the logical consistency of judgements, the coherence of a train of argument, but as applied to action that meaning could not suffice. When we ask the reason of an action, we inquire about its end or purpose, and we call the action reasonable in two senses—(1) if its end or purpose is a worthy one, and (2) if it is itself adapted to secure the end it aims at. If the assertion ‘The Universe is directed by Reason’ were intended in the latter sense only, it would mean just this: ‘The Universe is governed by a Purpose of some kind and all events that happen are means adapted to secure its realization.’

This assertion by itself would give no ground for the glad acceptance enjoined by Stoicism. It would not imply that the Purpose was a good one; it would not even exclude the possibility that the world was governed by a malignant Power. The Stoic must therefore have meant by his assertion, not only that the events of the world were directed by a Providence to realize a certain Purpose, but that the Purpose was a worthy one. He attributed, that is to say, value to the End towards which the Universe moved. Reason means in this case the apprehension of values. But value is something which has relation to persons. It would be no reason for my assenting joyfully to the Universe, if the value it secured were not what I understood by value. The Stoic teaching would accord with this statement, for it was one of the things most insisted upon in Stoicism that the reason in the individual breast was homogeneous with, of one substance with, the Supreme Reason in the Universe. It implied that the values which I, as a reasonable being, recognize are those to which the whole reasonable Universe is directed. That is why I can joyfully assent to whatever happens. It is the working out of a good which I recognize in myself as good. But what is the nature of this good? It is no use to look for answers to this question in the Stoic writings. Stoicism will go no farther than the bare assertion: The Universe is directed to realize a value which you, as a human being, could appreciate, if you knew the whole. That is all that its statement, ‘The Universe is reasonable’ can be made to yield.

One can understand the void which was thus left in the Stoic teaching by comparing it at this point with Christianity. Here, too, we find the faith that the Universe is governed by a Purpose towards a valuable end, but Christianity gives a positive image of this end by describing it as Love. In the relation of love between spiritual beings in this world, broken and imperfect as it is, the Christian holds that we see something whose completion and perfection is that divine far-off event to which the whole creation moves'. There is nothing in this inconsistent with the Stoic faith, The Universe is reasonable; only the Stoic presents, as it were, an empty form which the Christian fills with positive content. I don't wish to raise the question now whether the Christian is justified in doing so, or whether it is wiser to stop where the Stoic does, with a mere formal assertion. I want only to show that the Stoic does stop short.



THE COSMIC CONFLAGRATION



He tells us that the world-process realizes value of some kind, value which we could appreciate, and he tells us no more.

He tells us, I mean, nothing about the inner meaning of the world-process; about the process, looked at from outside as a series of events in time, the Stoic was more ready to make dogmatic affirmations than the Christian. Zeno taught that the present state of things, in which part of the Divine had sunk to the condition of inert matter and part had been distributed as individual souls, would cease by all being reabsorbed once more into the fiery Ether, which is Reason and God. God would again be all in all, a uniformity which excluded all inner diverseness, a homogeneous mass of pure fire. On its material side the doctrine conveys an apprehensible meaning; we can picture more or less a huge fiery sphere in empty space. On its spiritual side, it is harder to make sense of. For, to begin with, we can do little with a conception which identifies Reason with a material substance. And to speak of pure Reason existing by itself in an undifferentiated unity is to use words which convey nothing, I think, to the mind. Reason, we have seen, means primarily in this case the apprehension of values, and the Stoic gives us no hint what values the Divine Mind in its solitary oneness could apprehend.

Zeno did not, however, hold that the absorption of the Universe in the Primal Fire would be for ever. It is not easy for the speculative mind to rest in any limit as ultimate, and the thinker who had followed the world-process to its conflagration in God was left still straining his thought beyond. There was one way of obviating the discomfort of an absolute end. And this was to make the movement of the world circular. What had happened once could happen again. And beyond the period of unification in the Divine Fire Zeno forecast the beginning of another world-process which would follow exactly the same course as the present one and end, like it, in the one Fire. And so on for ever—for the present process was one of an infinite recurrent series — an everlasting, unvarying round. We may wonder that the human mind has acquiesced in such a view of things, even when we allow for its recoil from the notion of an absolute end; but it has done so, not in Greece only, but in India, and even in modern Europe. Those, however, in modern Europe who have embraced the hypothesis of the Eternal Recurrence have never pretended to regard the world-process as governed by rational purpose. In Stoicism the view is eminently incongruous. We are given a Purpose that leads nowhere. This must have made it all the harder to find any meaning in the term Reason, when men were told to assent joyfully to the world-process, with all its pains, because it was Reason which governed the whole.

But all this Stoic doctrine of salvation by acquiescence only met half the need of man. For the experience of each man, the Stoics insisted, was traversed by one broad distinction, the distinction between those parts which the man can control by his will and those parts which are independent of his will. This is the initial distinction with which the ethical doctrine of Stoicism sets out. A great part of each man's experience happens to him through no choice of his, through the play of natural forces, winds and fires and tides, through the play of thousands of human wills other than his. Part of his experience, on the other hand, he is continuously making by his own will. Strictly speaking, it is only his own inner dispositions, the Stoics taught, over which a man has full control. The only thing the Will can move with absolute security is itself. But it was nevertheless obvious that to some extent correspondent changes in the external world followed each man's acts of will, and that we were each of us bound to will on the supposition that such changes would take place in consequence of our volition. In so far man intervened actively in the course of things, and the precept which bade him adjust his will to accept what was given could not furnish him with a guide for action.

The Stoic teacher, in cutting off the Fear and Desire which held men in bondage to the external world, was suppressing the motives which largely determined the action of the ordinary man in that field, and he was bound to find for him some other principle of direction. True, the traditional code of society stamped certain sorts of conduct as good and bad respectively, but this was just one of the things whose authority had been shaken by the Sophistic inquiry. Man therefore wanted, not only something to give him peace of mind as passive to the overwhelming power of Nature, but something to guide him as active in the natural world.

There is obviously some difficulty in fitting any scheme of action to the Stoic doctrine of salvation by acquiescence. For if I am not to be troubled by the actions of other men because everything that happens is determined by the sovereign Reason to promote its Divine Plan, then it is hard to see why I need take thought for my own action.

Here is a difficulty which Stoicism never satisfactorily explained. It would, however, be hardly fair to reckon this very much to its discredit, since the difficulty in question is really an aspect of the standing problem of Evil, which no religious philosophy has been able to leave anything but a problem still. We may more justly tax Stoicism with not having faced the problem, with having rather glossed it over, or perhaps with never having been aware of it in its real poignancy. The problem of Evil is at its sharpest where the wills of finite individuals come into play. For everything which results from their volition seems on the religious hypothesis to have a double determination, to be determined by the Supreme Will in the Universe, and to be also determined by the finite individual will. If, as determined by the Supreme Will, it is good, how can it ever, as determined by the finite will, be evil? Cleanthes, the first to sit in the chair of the Founder in the Stoic school, skirts the problem in his great hymn:



THE PRAYER OF CLEANTHES



There is no work done upon earth apart from Thee, O God, Neither in the divine ethereal sky nor in the sea, Except what wicked men do in their own folly.



This seems plainly enough to maintain the really evil character of some human action at the expense of giving up its determination by God altogether. Cleanthes, however, tries to save the universality of Divine Providence in the following lines:



But Thou knowest how to make odd things even, And to order what is disorderly, and unlovely things are lovely to Thee. For in such wise hast Thou fitted all things together in one, good with evil, that there results one reasonable design (logos) of the whole, enduring for ever.



We see by the end of the hymn that the attitude of Cleanthes in practice and in emotion towards human action is determined by the view that much, or even most, of it is really evil. He closes with the urgent prayer to God for the conversion and salvation of men. We may regard this as an outbreak of the human soul, in spite of all intellectual theory. But it certainly seems to imperil the base of the Stoic teaching. For the moment I admit that things over which I have no control, such as other people's action, may be evil, I seem to be back again in the region of Fear and Desire. If on the other hand I hold to the view that no human action is evil, upon what can ethics of any kind be built?

Stoicism had then apparently to desert its base, when it set out to frame a rule for conduct in the world. It had to mark out a right and wrong, and it had to give a motive for action. Why should I engage in action of a particular sort? The Stoic answer seems to have been somewhat as follows: It is true that whatever you do, your action will be found to have subserved the Divine Plan, and so be good from the point of view of a spectator of the whole, but it will make all the difference to you personally whether you fall in willingly with the Divine Reason or struggle against it. It is only when your will is directed in harmony with the Divine Will that you can have peace of mind. And for you such peace is the supreme good, or rather the only good, and disharmony the only evil. But if your will is directed in harmony with God's, a certain sort of conduct will result.

In harmony with God's we have said, but the Stoic technical phrase was ‘in agreement with Nature.’ The two phrases for a Stoic would mean the same thing, for by Nature he understood that ruling principle in the Universe which was Reason and God. Only to call it Nature, in this connection indicated usefully its relation to individual things. For the word had come to contain implications such as ‘Nature' still has for us. The nature of an individual thing is the normal law of its being ; the words c natural' and c unnatural' imply that any violation of that law in the case of a conscious being leads to its being in a condition which is somehow wrong and uncomfortable. To the Stoic this multitude of norms applicable to individual things were so many different manifestations of the One Living Reason or Law which governed the Universe. A thing in harmony with its own nature was therefore in harmony with God.

But when was a thing in harmony with its nature? The Stoics answered, ‘When it is determined by its own Ruling Principle, by the highest thing in it; a plant, for instance, by the principle of vegetable life (which is called "nature" in the narrower sense), a beast by its animal soul, and a man by reason. The "ruling principle" in man is reason, a detached part of the Cosmic Reason. It is therefore well with a man only when his Ruling Principle is in a right state and really governs his being; when that is the case, he possesses all good.'

The right state of a man's Ruling Principle implied action of a particular kind as issuing from it. So far the Stoics were prepared to go in bringing the Wise Man out of an attitude of passive acceptance into action. But they were careful to insist that the state of his Ruling Principle was the Wise Man's only concern. That could be left to him, it seemed, without dragging him back into Fear and Desire, because that was a region wholly in his own power. He was absolute lord of his own will, but of nothing outside. And his Ruling Principle was in a right state when it retained its proper condition of pure Reason.

We are once more brought against the concept of Reason as a form which requires content. For it means, as we saw, the apprehension of true values. When the Stoic said, 'A man should be governed by reason and not passion,' we can only understand it to mean that a man should not allow his perception of true values to be obscured by transient emotions or bodily appetites. This does not yet tell us what are true values and how they are to be determined.

The Stoics, however, did not leave the concept of Reason as blank in the case of men as they did in the case of God. They made an attempt to indicate the values which Reason recognized. And first, a value inhered in the temper itself which the Wise Man maintained, in his fearlessness, his grand independence of the outside world. These things were good in themselves, with a goodness which could not be demonstrated by logical argument, but only immediately perceived. The Stoic school, at any rate from the time of Chrysippus, stood for an intuitional element in Ethics. They gave currency to the phrase ‘innate notions’ or preconceptions. They did not mean that men brought with them into the world the knowledge of any concrete thing, but that they brought a certain faculty of perceiving values, so as to know goodness when they saw it. Real good, we have seen, had to be confined to that part of the inner life which was controlled by the Will; there it could be always within reach. Difficulty arose from the fact that action lay in the outside sphere, and to admit the possibility of a right and a wrong in that action seemed to involve the recognition of a difference of values, a good and a bad, in outside things. This was a great crux for Stoicism, for on no account must the absolute tranquillity and the independence of the Wise Man be disturbed, and yet he must act as if differences between outside things mattered. Stoicism here becomes ingenious.

There is, it says, a difference of value even among things outside the domain of the will; in fact, the Greek word most corresponding in meaning to our value was introduced by Stoicism into the technical phraseology of the schools with special reference to a quality belonging to outside things, the term ataraxia, unworthy being coined as its antithesis. Only difference in value in this peculiar sense was not a difference of good and evil. Nothing was good but the good will, and nothing evil but the bad. (Mere verbal quibbling, opponents of Stoicism, like Plutarch, allege. But not justly; for the attitude of the Wise Man to the inner good—the good which consisted in a certain direction of the will—really was other than his attitude to any outside thing. His attitude towards every outside thing was emptied of desire—that is why they were all alike indifferent) in respect of good.

His action was not directed upon any outside thing in such a way that he failed, or was disappointed, if his intention was not realized. The point of the Stoics was that a thing may serve to give direction to action without being an object of desire. This is obviously true. Supposing you are a servant sent to fetch a parcel from the post office for your employer, you may be perfectly indifferent as to whether the parcel has arrived or not; your whole action in going to the post office, all the consecutive movements of your feet, will be directed by an intention to get the parcel, but if you found that it was not there, you would feel no disappointment, and rest satisfied with having fulfilled your part in the business. That is a type of the attitude of the Stoic Wise Man towards outside things. There are certain things which will give direction to his intention. The things to whose possession the Wise Man would direct his intention, but not his desire, Zeno described by the new term of things ‘promoted' or ‘preferred'. They are the things which possess 'value' in the sense we specified just now. For the opposite things, those to avoid which the Wise Man would direct his intention, but not his desire. Health and wealth, for instance, were among the promoted things; that is to say, they would be to the Wise Man exactly like the parcel at the post office in our illustration. His action would be directed by the intention of acquiring or keeping them, but no desire would go with it, so that if he lost health and wealth, it would be a matter of complete indifference to him; his good lay wholly in the right direction of the will, and that he had secured. You see that this scheme allows the Wise Man to engage in selective action without prejudice to his unchangeable inner tranquillity and freedom.

But on what principle would he select and reject? If Stoicism was going to furnish a practical guide for action, it must give some clear indication here. It resorted again to the concept of Nature. For a reasonable being only one thing in the strict sense was natural, and that was to have its reason in perfect activity. But there was a sense in which certain other conditions or circumstances were ‘natural' for it. According to the scheme of things framed by the Universal Reason, constituting Nature, those conditions or circumstances were such that actions directed to secure them were appropriate to it. There were first the instincts by which human beings in the earliest phase of life, when reason was still undeveloped and they were on the merely animal level, were directed to certain objects.

The Stoics specified the great object which the animal, and man in the animal stage, instinctively desired as the conservation of the individual being whole and sound. They were especially opposed to the Epicurean psychology which put Pleasure among these things instinctively sought. Pleasure, they maintained, supervened upon the satisfaction of the instinct, but was not its object. In turning to these objects the living creature was following a law established by Nature as the intelligent orderer of the Universe; when Reason supervened upon animal life, the old law of instinct was superseded by the higher law of Reason, and what had been natural for the animal was no longer natural, in the true sense, for the man. Man would still, however, have a respect for these connections made by the order of the world, and his will would be in a right attitude, in harmony with Nature, when it was directed by the intention of preserving his life, avoiding injury to his body, and so on. Whether he succeeded in compassing these things would, of course, now that he was a reasonable being, be a matter of indifference to him. It would be enough that he had done his best to compass them.

In laying stress upon this natural connection between certain objects of instinctive desire and the human animal, the Stoics were no doubt moved in great measure by the purpose of ruling out from the category of the ‘natural’ altogether a great mass of the refinements and elaborations which went with civilized society. The Cynic ideal of the simple life still worked in Stoicism. Of course, if you rigidly apply the principle that everything in the accessories of human society which distinguishes it from the life of the animal horde is unnatural, you would make away with human society altogether, and no Stoic teacher, I think, did anything of the kind.

On the other hand, if you once allow, as the Stoics did, that in the society of reasonable beings many things are in place which are not natural on the merely animal level, you can only use the term ‘natural' intelligently, if you mean c according to the norm which man ought to realize'. The term gives us no light as to what that norm is. Many people have felt that the life of complex societies, such as the Greek cities exhibited in the third century B.C. —though that was incomparably simpler than the life of our vast modern civilizations—prevents man from realizing the proper norm of his being as perfectly as he might under conditions nearer to those of primitive man or of the animals—the feeling which underlies the cry for the ‘simple life.’ If they are right, then they can say with justice that life without such and such complications is more ‘natural’ for man. People, however, who have this feeling have always been liable to use the word ‘natural' in a double sense, the sense of ‘what ought to be if man realizes his true being', and the other sense of ‘near to primitive conditions', because the characteristics which civilized man shares with primitive man, and still more those which man shares with the beasts, are universal over a larger field and more ‘natural’ in that sense. By using the one word in this double sense they seem to prove that man realizes his true being the better, the nearer he is to primitive conditions. Of course, the proof of that is exactly what they beg by their use of the word.

The Stoics, among other advocates of the simple life, were open to this criticism. Yet they were right enough in feeling that among the things which made it difficult for the citizen of a Greek city, or the courtier of a Hellenistic king, to win the one good of inner peace and freedom were the complications of civilized society. He would never, for instance, have been distracted by the lust for gold, if the gold had been left where it was before, in the ground. To drag the precious metals out of the ground was therefore, they said, ‘unnatural.’ So, too, to navigate the seas for the purpose of bringing the products of one country into another was ‘unnatural.’ One can see, I think, that one of the main things which recommended the concept of Nature, of the natural, to the Stoic preacher was the weapon it gave him for striking freely at the things which held men back from the way of peace. When he directed the intention of his disciples in selective action to those things which were ‘primary in the order of nature' the phrase had a strongly negative, as well as a positive, meaning.

The practical result of the Stoic ethical teaching, so far as we have followed it at present, was that the things which the action of the Wise Man was directed to secure would largely be the same as those pursued by the common man. The text-books give the list of c promoted things ' as being, in the sphere of the soul, cleverness, skill, intellectual progress, and the like; in the sphere of the body, life, health, strength, good condition, completeness of members, beauty; in the sphere of detached things, wealth, repute, gentle birth, and the like. Certain things, however, which the common man pursued would not for the Wise Man be even in the class of things promoted; he would not lift a finger to secure them, and the Stoics, no doubt in intentional defiance of the rival Epicurean school, maintained that Pleasure was among these. Pleasure was one of the things indifferent in the double sense; it had not even such value as would direct the action of the Wise Man to obtaining it, where he could. Whether an action produced pleasure or pain, it would no more enter his head to consider than it would to speculate on the number of his hairs. We must remember that by pleasure the Stoics meant, perhaps exclusively, agreeable bodily sensation ; even with this restriction the doctrine is sufficiently severe. But where the Wise Man pursued the same object as the common man, his mind in pursuing it was quite different; he would pursue it because Nature indicated it as a right thing for him to have, with a complete absence of desire.

So far, the objects which we have mentioned as directing the Wise Man's action have all been objects to which he would address himself, with the purpose of acquiring them himself; we have dealt with actions which in a common man would be self-regarding. Did the kathekonta, the actions appropriate to a human being, include altruistic ones? Having set the Wise Man in a position of magnificent detachment from the world's unrest, could Stoicism draw him forth again into contact with the multitude? Stoicism here reaches the most critical part of its task, and it is extraordinarily interesting to trace its procedure. The Stoic teachers affirmed that social service was above all else appropriate to the Wise Man. Once more they brought in the concept of Nature in order to establish the connection between the Wise Man and unsaved humanity—of Nature, as the purposive Intelligence ordering the Universe. So far as Nature's Purpose can be discovered by the constitution of things, the will of the Wise Man will be adjusted in accordance with it. Now the constitution of things showed clearly, the Stoics said, that Nature had not intended the individual man to be an isolated unit, but a citizen of the great City which is the whole world, a member of the species in all of whom dwelt a particle of the Divine Reason. They pointed, and pointed with justice, to the significant fact that among the primary animal instincts was found the altruistic one which impelled the parent to sacrifice itself for its young. The sphere, however, within which the primary instinct restricted mutual help was a narrow one, the sphere of the family. With the development of Reason, the individual man came to see his solidarity with the whole human race. He recognized that Nature intended him to devote himself to the service of society at large, to sacrifice his life, if occasion arose, for his friend or his city or mankind.

Such social actions were eminently kathekonta, appropriate, and the Stoic books, when they use the term, refer principally to these. There are many fine passages enforcing the obligations which lie upon man as the member of a community, or drawing a picture of the beneficent toil of the Wise Man in a distressful world. When therefore we find one who wrote with knowledge of these things, Charles Bigg, saying that the formula of the Stoic was barely ‘My soul and God,’ whereas the formula of the Christian is My soul, my brother's soul, and God our first impulse is to bring up against him passages of that kind, which seem to state so emphatically the duty of the individual to concern himself with his brethren.

But I believe, if we look closer, we shall see that Charles Bigg was right. The Wise Man was not to concern himself with his brethren— that is the point—he was only to serve them. Benevolence he was to have, as much of it as you can conceive; but there was one thing he must not have, and that was love. Here too, if that inner tranquillity and freedom of his was to be kept safe through everything—here too, as when he was intending to acquire objects for himself, he must engage in action without desire. He must do everything which it is possible for him to do, shrink from no extreme of physical pain, in order to help, to comfort, to guide his fellow-men, but whether he succeeds or not must be a matter of pure indifference to him. If he has done his best to help you and failed, he will be perfectly satisfied with having done his best. The fact that you are no better off for his exertions will not matter to him at all. Pity, in the sense of a painful emotion caused by the sight of other men's suffering, is actually a vice. The most that can be allowed when the Wise Man goes to console a mourner, is that he should feign sympathy as a means of attaining his object, but he must take care not to feel it. He may sigh, Epictetus says, provided the sigh does not come from his heart. In the service of his fellow men he must be prepared to sacrifice his health, to sacrifice his possessions, to sacrifice his life; but there is one thing he must never sacrifice, his own eternal calm.

People are liable to treat these doctrines of Stoicism as a kind of gratuitous overstraining of the note for the sake of effect. Those who wish to set Stoicism in a favourable light would have us not judge it by these occasional exaggerations of its principle. Professor Arnold glides over them as lightly and quickly as he can. After all, he says, the Stoics insisted that a man should do all he could to relieve distress, and that came practically to the same thing as if they allowed him to be sorry for it. I am afraid my feelings in the matter differ totally from Professor Arnold's; to me, curiously, it would make all the difference in the world, if, when my friend sighed for my trouble, I thought he really minded or not. I do not think that the Stoic doctrine, forbidding sympathy and pity, forbidding what we understand by love, was a perversion of their principle: it seems to me the essential consequence of it, a consequence of immense practical importance—the keystone, as it were, of their system.

Of course, even in antiquity the Stoic casting-out of pity excited repugnance. It was the great stumbling-block of Stoicism in the department of Ethics. Something in the heart of men rose up against it. It is difficult for us to-day in Europe to take it as seriously meant. Our own ethical code has been fashioned under the influence of a different ideal, the Christian one, which makes the highest good, not tranquillity, but love. I do not mean to imply that Europe is Christian in any real sense I do not think it is; yet its standards of things have been powerfully affected by the Christianity which has somehow gone on subsisting in its midst. But when we look outside Christendom, the Stoic conception of the supreme good appears to command wide acceptance.

Although the human heart in ancient Greece recoiled from the pitiless conclusion to which Stoic thought carried its premises, the premise that the supreme good was eudaimonia, a state of inner satisfaction, of tranquillity, was not challenged. And when we extend our survey still farther over the world, we may see that if you take the mere area over which the ideal of ancient Greek thought is dominant, it is larger than Europe. In India also complete detachment from the world of Fear and Desire has been for multitudes the supreme goal of wisdom, and Buddhism has carried from India the ideal of Detachment to the great nations which it has penetrated farther East. The Bhagavadgita and the Buddhist scriptures present strange harmonies of language with the Stoic teaching; here, too, we find a great deal about good action, with the proviso that such action must be unaccompanied with desire; a great deal about benevolence, provided that there be no love.

I think it is important to realize that mankind has two different ideals before it; and I do not see how the ideal of Detachment is compatible with the ideal of Love. If we choose one, we must forgo the other; each ideal appears faulty when judged by the measure of the other. With the one goes to a large extent the intellect of ancient Greece and of India, with the other the Christian Church and the hearts of men, the anima naturaliter Christiana; for neither in Greece nor India nor China have the philosophers been the whole of the people—nor their philosophy the whole of the philosophers. There have been things tending to obscure this divergence between the two ideals.

The language used by the Stoics or Buddhists about benevolence may often be taken to be inspired by the Christian ideal of Love. On the other hand, the Christian ideal has involved detachment from many things, from the cares of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches and the lusts of other things, and much of the language used about this sort of detachment in Christian books may seem to point to the ideal of ancient Greece and India. The Stoic sage strenuously labouring to do good and indifferent whether good is done, sighing with his stricken friend, but not from the heart, is a figure serving well to bring home to us the difference. And we may see, I think, that the Stoics and sages of India could say no less without giving up their whole scheme. If the supreme end is tranquillity, of what use would it be to set the Wise Man's heart free from disturbance by cutting off the Fear and Desire which made him dependent upon outside things, if one immediately opened a hundred channels by which the world's pain and unrest could flow into his heart through the fibres, created by love and pity, connecting his heart with the fevered hearts of men all round? A hundred fibres!—one aperture would suffice to let in enough of the bitter surge to fill his heart full. Leave one small hole in a ship's side and you let in the sea. The Stoics, I think, saw with perfect truth that if you were going to allow any least entrance of love and pity into the breast, you admitted something whose measure you could not control, and might just as well give up the idea of inner tranquillity at once. Where love is, action cannot be without desire; the action of love has eminently regard to fruit, in the sense of some result beyond itself—the one thing that seems to matter is whether the loved person really is helped by your action. Of course you run the risk of frustrated desire and disappointment. The Stoic sage was never frustrated and never disappointed. Gethsemane, looked at from his point of view, was a signal break-down. The Christian's Ideal Figure could never be accepted by the Stoic as an example of his typical Wise Man.

It was cast up as a reproach against Stoicism by its opponents in antiquity that its Wise Man was an impossible Ideal. The Stoics admitted that he was as rare in the real world as the phoenix; Socrates, perhaps, and Diogenes had attained; or perhaps not even they. What made it worse was that the Stoics recognized no inferior degrees of wisdom; an ideal useful in practical life is one which can be in some measure, however imperfectly, realized; the Stoics' ideal could not be realized at all, except perfectly. The man a foot below the water, in their favourite illustration, is in a drowning condition just as much as the man a mile down. Supposing a man attained, he passed by an instantaneous transition into the state of salvation, the state of the Wise Man; thenceforth he possessed all good and every imaginable kind of virtue; every action he performed was perfect (a katorthoma, a complete achievement). Every one except the Wise Man, even he who had progressed so far as to be on the point of attainment, was concluded under one condemnation as foolish and bad. And since wisdom was attained so rarely, if ever, the whole of mankind are to be thought of as in this evil case. I think even in this doctrine we may see more than the pedantic desire to carry out a rigid scheme in defiance of common sense. That the Stoics held up an ideal never completely realized in any concrete man is hardly to be considered a fault at all.

That they refused to allow a relative worth to imperfect achievement is a more serious charge. But it was really very difficult for them, with their premises, to do so. For the whole point of the ideal state, as they presented it, was its security, its freedom from fear; a single breach in that security, and its virtue was gone. We may revert to the figure of the ship: a hole one foot in diameter, if not stopped, renders it unseaworthy as truly as a hole ten feet or twenty feet in diameter. The only difference is, that it takes less time to make the ship with the smaller hole seaworthy. And the Stoics said that there was just this difference between one man and another. All alike came short of the Wise Man's security, but there were some for whom but comparatively little work would be necessary to bring them into a state of salvation. The faint shadow of a chance that you might some day attain, that alone made it worth while to enter upon the way of learning and discipline which led in that direction. Those who were called wise, in the common popular sense, the masters of philosophy—he himself, Chrysippus said—were men walking along that road; they had not indeed attained wisdom, but they were ‘advancing’ (prokoptontes). I cannot help feeling that there was something fine in the persistent refusal of the Stoics to take any second-best instead of their Ideal, to say always to every actual character you might set before them, c No, not that, not that; the one we have dreamed of is fairer far than that, more magnificent and wonderful. Earth has never seen him, or at best it saw him but for a moment, and he was gone.

It is said that when the Stoics came to practice they had to give up their impossible sages, and construct a scheme of duties for the common man, and it is sometimes said that the kathekonta, ‘appropriate things,’ were these duties of a lower order which the Stoics had to teach, in default of the perfect actions (the katorthomata) of the Wise Man. This, I think, is a confusing way of putting the case, and the translation of kathekonta by our word ‘duties’ is unfortunate. The kathekonta were the actions appropriate, according to the order of Nature, to every living being after its kind; in the case of man the actions appropriate to his human character, described in their formal aspect. As performed by the Wise Man, they would be perfect kathekonta or katorthomata because their inner content, the spirit in which they were performed, would be completely right. The kathekonta can be performed by the common man—and will, of course, be performed by those who are prokoptontes, advancing—only in the sense that their action is the same as the Wise Man's, looked at from the outside; it would not be a katorthomata, because the accompanying spiritual state will have been imperfect. We may think of Nature as the cosmic dramaturge, and the kathekonta as the role she has attached to each character in the drama, only in this case the state of mind of each actor, as he plays his part, is as important as the formal correctness of his action.

For instance, the action rendering back a deposit is a kathekon attached by Nature to the role of Man; the common man can perform it so far as external correctness goes; the Wise Man alone can perform it phronimos, in the spirit of wisdom, and therefore make the action a good one in the true sense. The kathekonta set before the common man are not a different set of duties, a different scheme of action, from those set before the sage; they are just the bare book of the play, as it were, not in themselves good or bad, but neutral, becoming good only when filled with the spirit put into them by the Wise Man.

Because even the common man can perform the letter of the drama, the kathekonta are set before him also, and his performance of them will advance him that far on the way towards goodness. It is this fact which has misled the people who take them to be a lower order of duties framed by the Stoics as a concession to human weakness. There is no concession here, so far as I can see. In practice, no doubt, they habitually accommodated themselves to the ordinary view by treating a kathekon performed by an unsaved man as a good action, but their theory of the kathekonta does not seem to me to show any weakening in their dogma.

In a somewhat casual manner we have now walked about the city of refuge constructed in this troublous world by the prophet-philosophers of the Porch; we have told the towers thereof and marked the bulwarks. That fabric of dogma will seem to many grim and unpleasing. The very fact that dogma is beginning to take the place of the tentative speculation of earlier days will be pointed to as evidence that the Greek spirit is in decline. I think we must admit that from the point of view of the pure philosopher, the Stoic dogmatic system is on a lower level than the philosophy of Plato or Aristotle. The desire to know what is true, without any regard to the emotional value or practical consequences of what is discovered, is the only motive which should govern a philosopher, as a philosopher. And the Stoic philosophy was determined all through, we must admit, by a practical need. The pure philosopher is, however, an abstraction not embodied in any living man, and the desire to know for knowing's sake is not the only legitimate desire belonging to human nature.

Few people would consider it immoral in any one whose friend was accused of something disgraceful, if he approached the examination of the facts with the wish to find one alternative true rather than the other. It is only required of him not to falsify what he finds. And why should it be immoral, when the Power governing the Universe is accused of being indifferent to Good and Evil, if a man approaches the momentous question with a wish to find one alternative true rather than the other? He will only be blameable, surely, if his wish induces him to falsify facts.

The wish of the Stoics to ascertain that the Power governing the Universe was rational led them into a dogmatism, for which a modern man will probably consider they had no justification. He will feel that they ought to have spoken with more diffidence and hesitation on matters so far transcending human reach, or that they ought even to have suspended judgement altogether. I do not myself think that we are shut up to the alternative between Stoic dogmatism and the attitude of mere scepticism. The Stoic dogmatism was certainly a philosophic fall. I would only urge, in the Stoics' defence, that it is unfair to talk as if the world could stop still while we are ascertaining by pure philosophy of just how much we can be certain. Meanwhile, there is life to be lived. It was an immediately urgent problem for hundreds in the Athens of 300 B. C. on what principle, on what estimate of the world, they were going to frame their lives in that very moment of time.

Stoicism gave them a scale of values, and I think we have good ground for believing that it did nerve innumerable men for centuries to brave action and brave endurance in a world where brute force and cruelty had dreadful scope. The philosopher's cloak, we may be sure, often covered a mass of human weakness and even villainy—so far mockers like Lucian had facts to bear out their bitter laughter. But there must have been true men, in order to make the Stoic a credible figure for so many centuries. We should have found, I think, could we have visited that old world, men of different ranks and conditions, free men and slaves, going through life with a strange tranquillity and strength—with that almost uncanny detachment still to-day, we are told, attained in countries where deliverance from Desire and Fear is taken as the supreme goal, and sought by the path of a long, deliberate discipline.

It may be of interest to notice the affinity with Stoic doctrine in such passages of the Bhagavadgita as the following.



I. The Stoic wise man has certainty of the truth and is never misled by sense-impressions.



All works without limit, O son of Pritha, are contained in knowledge. . . . Knowing that, thou wilt never again fall into such bewilderment, O son of Pandu. . . Even though thou shouldst be of all sinners the greatest evildoer, thou shalt be by the boat of knowledge carried over all evil. [Stoicism a man who attained passed by an instantaneous transition from the state of ignorance and misery to that of wisdom and bliss.] . . . There is naught here that is like in power of cleansing to knowledge: this the adept of the Rule himself finds after many days in his Self. Knowledge he wins who has faith, who is devoted, who restrains the instruments of sense; having won knowledge, he speedily comes to supreme peace (iv. 33-9).



That understanding, O son of Pritha, is of the Goodness-Mood, which knows action and inaction, the thing to be done and the thing to be not done, the thing to be feared and the thing to be not feared, bondage and deliverance (xviii. 30).



2. Every one, except the Sage, is in a state of folly and misery, completely destitute of good.



In him who is not under the Rule is no understanding; in him who is not under the Rule is no inspiration; in him who feels no inspiration peace is not; in him who has not peace whence can there be joy?



3. The action of the Sage is guided by the connections established by Nature.



For it was with works that Janaka and others came unto adeptship; thou too shouldst do them, considering the order of the world.



4. But the action of the Sage is free from desire or attachment to any outside thing.



As do the unwise, attached to works, O thou of Bharata's race, so should the wise do, but without attachment, seeking to establish order in the world (iii. 25).



Free from attachment to fruit of works, everlastingly contented, unconfined, even though he be engaged in work, he does not work at all (iv. 20).



Sacrifice, almsgiving, and mortification should not be surrendered, but should verily be done; sacrifice, almsgiving, and mortification purify sages. But these very works must be done with surrender of attachment and fruits; such is the decision of my most high doctrine, O son of Pritha (xviii. 5, 6). A worker is said to be of Goodness who is free from attachment, speaks not of an 7, is possessed of constancy and vigour, and is unmoved whether he gain or gain not (xviii. 26).



In works be thine office; in their fruits must it never be. Be not moved by the fruit of works; but let not attachment to worklessness dwell in thee. Abidhig under the Rule and casting off attachment, O Wealth-Winner, so do thy works, indifferent alike whether thou gain or gain not. Indifference is called the Rule (ii. 47, 48).



5. Hence the Sage is never afraid and never fails. Herein there is no failing of enterprise nor backsliding.



Even a very little of this Law saves from the great dread (ii. 40).



6. All things except the right state of his will are indifferent to him.



The learned look with indifference alike upon a wise and courteous Brahman, a cow, an elephant, a dog, or an outcast man (v. 18).



Most excellent is he whose understanding is indifferent alike to the friend, the lover, the enemy, the indifferent, the one facing both ways, the hateful, and the kinsman, alike to the good and the evil (vi. 9).



One indifferent to foe and to friend, indifferent in honour and in dishonour, in heat and in cold, in joy and in pain, free of attachment, who holds in equal account blame and praise, silent, content with whatsoever befall, homeless, firm of judgement, possessed of devotion, is a man dear to Me (xii. 18. 19).



Unattachment, independence of child, wife, home, and the like, everlasting indifference of mind whether fair or foul befall him . . . these are declared to be knowledge (xiii. 9, 10).



He to whom pain and pleasure are alike; who abides in himself; to whom clods, stones, or gold are alike; to whom things sweet and things not sweet are equal; who is wise; to whom blame and praise of himself are equal; who is indifferent to honour and dishonour, indifferent to the interests of friend or foe; who renounces all undertakings—he is said to have passed beyond the Moods (xiv. 24, 25).



7. He is without emotions.



He whose mind is undismayed in pain, who is freed from longings for pleasure, from whom passion, fear, and wrath have fled, is called a man of abiding prudence, a saintly man. He who is without affection for aught, and whatever fair or foul fortune may betide neither rejoices in it nor loathes it, has wisdom abidingly set (ii. 56, 57).



He who rejoices not, hates not, grieves not, desires not, who renounces alike fair and foul, and has devotion, is dear to Me (xii. 17).



8. Love can find no place in his heart.



He whom all loves enter as waters enter the full and immovably established ocean wins to peace ; not so the lover of loves (ii. 70).



The man whose every motion is void of love and purpose, whose works are burned away by the fire of Knowledge, the enlightened call c learned' (iv. 19). The learned grieve not for them whose lives are fled nor for them whose lives are not fled (ii. 11).



And so the Supreme Being declares of Himself:



‘I am indifferent to all born beings; there is none whom I hate, none whom I love.’ (ix. 29).



9. The Sage is established in unshakeable calm and harmony with the Universe.



When thine understanding, that erstwhile swayed unbalanced by reason of what thou hast heard, shall stand firm and moveless in consent, then shalt thou come into the Rule (ii. 53).

Firm of understanding, unbewildered, the knower of Brahma, who abides in Brahma, will not rejoice when pleasant things befall nor be dismayed when things unpleasing betide him. His spirit unattached to outward touch, he finds in his Self-pleasantness; his spirit following the Brahma-Rule, he is fed with undying pleasantness. And yet certain involuntary bodily reactions remain even in the Sage. The ranges of sense vanish away from a body-dweller who haunts them not, save only relish (rasa) (ii. 59).



No action of the Sage is haphazard but every one part of a reasonable scheme of life.

The sorrow-staying Rule is with him whose eating and walking are by rule, whose action in works is by rule, whose sleeping and waking are by rule.

Deliverance is only won by a long and persevering discipline. Doubtless the mind is ill to check and fickle, O mighty-armed one; but by constant labour and passion-lessness, O son of Kunti, it may be held. For one of unrestrained spirit the Rule is hard of attainment, I trow; but by one of obedient spirit who strives it may be won by the means thereto (vi. 35, 36).



It can hardly be necessary to point out that the headings of the sections above are not part of the quotations, but give the Stoic doctrine to which the quotations show a parallel. Any one who went through Epictectus, Seneca, and Marcus Aurelius with the object of finding parallels to these extracts from the most popular devotional book of the Hindus could, I believe, find many striking similarities of phrase. One must, of course, admit that there is a great deal besides in the Gita, which belongs to a different world from that of the Stoics, and that the metaphysics and devotional religion which underly its ethics are different from the metaphysical basis of Stoicism, It is recognized, too, that the Gita is itself composed of heterogeneous elements, whether that is to be accounted for by the supposition that different hands in different centuries have been at work upon it or by the supposition that different streams of tradition had become confused in the mind of one author. Passages, no doubt, may be found in the Gita inconsistent with the ruling out of love and emotion, which is exemplified in the passages cited above, and is logically required by the ideal of tranquillity.





LECTURE III


POSIDONIUS





IF YOU read the literature which has accumulated in recent years about the religious and philosophical beliefs prevalent in the Greco-Roman world at the time of Christ, there is one personality whom you encounter at every turn, Posidonius. You gather that he is the one man whose mind penetrates and informs all the philosophical writing which has come down to us from that age. And yet till recently Posidonius was not a person who bulked very large in the thought of the average classical scholar. The fragments of which he is expressly stated in our sources to be the author do not, when collected, make a large book. The late Master of Balliol published two volumes on The Evolution of Theology in the Greek Philosophers without mentioning the name of Posidonius. But the scholars who have worked in this field have come to believe that Posidonius is only very inadequately represented by the fragments expressly attributed to him. They have come to see Posidonius behind a great deal of Cicero, a great deal of Philo of Alexandria, of Diodorus, of Manilius, of Seneca, of Plutarch. We may compare him perhaps to a painter of whose own work little is left, but whose style shines reflected in a whole school of pupils. So behind the later philosophical literature of antiquity stands, we are told, one great figure. Who was this man?

His original home was in Syria, at Apamea, one of the Greek cities founded, about a century and a half before his birth, on the Orontes. The place seems to have a more tropical character than most of Syria, a hot, swampy basin, shut in by hills, where the Seleucid kings had kept their herd of Indian elephants. Whether Posidonius had any native Syrian blood we do not know. At the time when he was born, about 135 B.C. apparently, the Seleucid kingdom was nearing its disruption. Posidonius was probably a child when the last strong king, Antiochus Sidetes, perished in his attempt to win back the Eastern provinces from the Parthian. After that, anarchy in Syria went from bad to worse.

The princes of the royal house turned practically into condottleri, ranging the country with hired troops, in endless feuds, one against the other, and the cities, becoming more and more independent, carried on petty wars against each other on their own account. It was among such surroundings that Posidonius, we must suppose, grew up. Among the fragments of his writings are two which express his contemptuous disgust with the slack, pleasure-loving existence characteristic of the Syrian Greek cities, and the wretched farce of their military operations. He must have left his country as quite a young man, if it is true that he sat under Panaetius at Athens. Panaetius of Rhodes, the friend of Scipio Aemilianus, in his old age presided in Athens over the Stoic School; and since he died about 10 B.C., Posidonius cannot have been at that date more than about twenty-five. Those were the days when Hasdrubal-Clitomachus, of whom we shall speak in the fourth lecture, was expounding the Scepticism of Carneades at Athens in the seat of Plato. Stoicism, however, was the teaching which the young Syrian Greek found to meet best the need of his heart, whether because his childhood in Syria had been under the influence of some indigenous mystical tradition, to which Stoic pantheism showed affinities, or because in his recoil from the baseness and frivolity of his home he was attracted by what was most earnest and austere. All one can say is that, from the time he was a young man, he seems to have turned his back on the country of his birth: this does not look as if, consciously at any rate, he wished to identify himself with Syrian Hellenism.

His face was towards the West. All the lands round the Mediterranean had just been brought together in a new way by the unifying power of the republic on the Tiber, in process of becoming an empire. And the curiosity of Posidonius extended over all this realm. He saw with his own eyes the sun set in the Atlantic beyond the verge of the known world, and the African coast over against Spain, where the trees were full of apes, and the villages of barbarous peoples inland from Marseilles, where human heads hanging at the house-doors for trophies were an everyday sight.' When at last, about 95 B.C., he wanted to fix his home somewhere, he chose the place where, perhaps more than any other, the old Greek republican spirit still survived, a strenuous maritime state as great a contrast to the cities of Syria as any Greek city could be, the city of his Stoic master Panaetius. Posidonius became a citizen by adoption of Rhodes. Among this free people he spent the second half of his long life. Once he held the highest office in the state. At another time he went as ambassador for Rhodes to Rome. His name, before he died, was become well known all over the Greek world; in those circles of Roman society where interest in Greek literature and Greek thought was alive, he had many personal friends. Cicero, in his young days, spent some time in Rhodes in order to study Greek philosophy under him, and they continued in later life to correspond. In 59 Cicero sent his own account of his consulship to his old master, suggesting that he, the most eminent Greek historian of the day, might find it fit matter for his pen—a suggestion which unfortunately fell flat. On two occasions, it would seem, Pompey, during his wars in the East, turned aside to visit the philosopher of Rhodes. The death of Posidonius fell apparently about 51 B.C., when he had reached the ripe age of 84.

It is not only as a philosopher in the special sense that Posidonius stood at the head of his generation. His historical work, continuing Polybius, is the great source from which our notices of the Greek East in that period are derived. Posidonius, as a historian, is however a subject which belongs to another inquiry. Here one may only observe, looking at the fragments of his history which have come down to us, how predominantly his concern as a moral philosopher seems to have directed his attention to anthropology and to ethical values. He expatiated with curious interest upon the manners and customs of peoples like the Kelts of the Far West. Instances of luxury or moral weakness it was his way to set in the fierce light of a minute description; on the other hand, he recorded with obvious satisfaction, how the peoples of Italy were still so frugal that even well-to-do people expected their sons to dine happily on nuts or pears and drink nothing but water. With regard to moral standards, at any rate, the traditions of his Syrian home had worked upon him mainly in the way of antipathy.

Besides occupying a conspicuous place in the roll of Greek historians, Posidonius meets us again as a notable figure when we come into the field of Natural Science in antiquity. His extensive travels towards the North and West were largely prompted by the desire to make scientific observations of tides and physical phenomena generally, and in this department, too, he delivered his results to the world in a voluminous series of writings. Something of all that still reaches us through the medium of Strabo, or Seneca in his Natural Questions and passed on through later writers into the tradition of the Middle Ages. But again it would belong to a special inquiry, which is outside the purpose of these lectures, to study the significance of Posidonius as a man of science. It is in his character of philosopher and theologian that he comes within our purview.

And the first thing, I think, which is obvious about Posidonius when we look at him in this respect, is that he represents a tendency which had come to prevail largely in the time preceding the Christian era—the tendency of the different schools of Greek philosophy to coalesce. Eclecticism, syncretism, was, we know, the note of religious and philosophical thought in the later stages of the ancient paganism. The Sceptical and the Epicurean schools, of course, stood out, and maintained a hostile attitude to the rest, so far as they managed to survive. But the atmosphere of the time was unfavourable to them. Among men of leisure and elegant interests, Epicureanism still had numerous adherents in the last century B. C., but in a generation or two it had dwindled to be an eccentric creed under popular reprobation. On the other hand, the philosophies which stood for ideal values against all scepticism and materialism, whether of the philosophic or of the popular kind, felt more and more that they were upholding a common cause and drew together. The school of Plato, as represented by the men actually in occupation of the Academy, when Posidonius was a young man in Athens, had, as we shall see, settled altogether into the sceptical line, but the writings of Plato himself, with all they contained of positive doctrine, the writings of his early disciples, Xenocrates and Philip of Opus, were still there. The Pythagorean writings, too, with which the positive side of Plato and the older Academy had had such close affinity, were still there. In the Peripatetic school a theory of the world and human conduct was still maintained which, if not quite of a pattern that the strict Stoics could approve, agreed at any rate with them in maintaining that the Reason in man was akin to the Divine principle at work in the Universe, and that no good could be set in the scale against virtue.

At a time when many men, not philosophers in any special sense, wanted some guide for life which was raised above the old mythologies and which yet met their sense of some greater spiritual Reality encompassing the life of men, it was natural that a kind of body of popular philosophic doctrine should come into vogue, made of the common places of the different schools, with a blurring of their distinctive peculiarities. People got the idea of a sort of common philosophic stuff at the back of the differences, very much, I think, as a large number of people of to-day cling to the idea of something which they call ‘undenominational', ‘un-dogmatic' religion—the idea of some common religious stuff which you may take for granted at the back of all articulate religious beliefs. I suppose you are bound to get this sort of popular eclecticism wherever there is a widespread craving for positive theory of some kind, and the multitude is confronted with a variety of teachers. The multitude has not the ability or the patience to think out the issues, and some theory it must have, so it takes what it wants from any quarter and makes its own compound as best it can, in its own muddled happy-go-lucky way. The eclecticism of later antiquity was the inevitable consequence of philosophy becoming popular.

It may be, of course, that in certain cases the multitude is right, that the instinct which guides its casual selection and rejection is on the whole sound. In such cases we may expect that if a great independent thinker arises, he too will take elements impartially from the different rival systems and combine them in a new body, But it will be a new body, a new system with an organic life of its own, not a mere aggregate of diverse elements, like the philosophy of the multitude. Teachers, however, of another kind may arise. The philosophic schools are not above being influenced by the conditions in the world round about them. When eclecticism is in the air, a philosopher, who is not a great original thinker, may dominate his age simply by putting together the different elements which the age wants—which he himself, as a child of the age, wants—in the proper philosophic dress, in an effective literary shape. Did the last century before Christ produce any great thinker, to take up the tradition of the different schools, and give the world a new system, stamped with his own creative originality, like the systems of Plato and Aristotle generations before, and the systems of Plotinus and Augustine generations later? Or did it only produce teachers able to give philosophic shape to the popular eclecticism?

Of all its philosophic writers, only two survive in their own works to-day—the Italian Cicero and the Hebrew Philo, if we may be allowed to reckon Philo to this century, since he can hardly have been more than thirty at the birth of Christ, Now Cicero is eminently a type of the writer who gives effective literary shape to other people's thought, and the philosophy which Philo expounds is essentially the popular Greek philosophy, a blend of Platonism, Pythagoreanism, and Stoicism, slightly modified by the Hebrew belief in God. But behind the Italian and behind the Hebrew are their Greek teachers, whom we know only through them and through later writers, and amongst those teachers the figure of Posidonius bulks most largely. Do we discern in that background any great work of fresh constructive thought?

I don't think we do. I don't think either Posidonius, or Antiochus of Ascalon, who made his own blend of Platonism and Stoicism, or any other Greek teacher of the time that we know of, can count for much as an original thinker. There is no distinctive philosophy of Posidonius as there is a distinctive philosophy of Plato or Plotinus. The importance of Posidonius does not lie there. It was rather his great work, that no one else gathered up so completely the mass of beliefs which held the minds of men and gave them a form so impressive and eloquent as he did. The great body of his writings expressed with unique completeness the general mind of the Greek world at the Christian era: he focused it and made it conscious of itself. Hence it was that later writers on theology and philosophy, on geography and natural science, found Posidonius the most productive and most readily accessible source to draw from. He combined the advantages of a highly-coloured and fascinating writer with those of an encyclopedia.

The fact, of course, that the matter of Posidonius was drawn from the stock philosophy of the schools and from popular belief makes it harder to assign to him personally with any security much that we find in later writers of the same character. For it may have come to them through other mediums. It has been pointed out, for instance, that the philosophy taken over from the Greeks by Philo of Alexandria is very much the same sort of blend of Platonism and Stoicism as seems to have been retold by Posidonius. It is unlikely that Philo did his own compounding. Hence, the German, keen ever to discover sources behind sources, cries Posidonius jubilantly. Now, although Philo never mentions the name of Posidonius, it may well be that the writings of that philosopher were actually the chief source from which he drew. But for the reason I have pointed out, this seems to me just a case where we cannot be sure. We are apt to forget that the great names of antiquity which have come down to us were associated in the real world with thousands of little names now forgotten; that all over the Greek world, when Philo wrote, there were hundreds of schools humming with the old commonplaces, and hundreds of eager scribblers putting down the old themes with some slight novelty of variation—think of Horace's Crispinus, inexhaustibly prolific of little books of popular Stoicism; we are apt to forget how much of the propagation, transmission, modification of ideas must have been performed by that obscure, unrecorded industry, which no kritik will ever be able to trace.

The consolation is, that the very circumstances which make it difficult to identify the work of Posidonius in other writers make it less important to do so. If the real significance of Posidonius is that he focused and expressed the general belief of his time, the important thing is the general belief itself. And this we can extract with assurance from the documents. We can see a certain common element running through much of Cicero and Seneca and Plutarch and Philo of Alexandria—a body of ideas whose general currency they presuppose. If we like to label this body of ideas ' Posidonius', in order to give it a distinctive name, it may be useful to do so, What really matters is, that we should grasp the body of ideas as a fact of the world at that period of time.

Stoicism, as we saw in previous lectures, with its dogmatic formulae and its categorical rules of conduct, was fitted more than any other philosophy to take the place of decaying religion in the ordinary educated society of the Greco-Roman world. And Stoicism was the basis of the body of ideas represented by Posidonius. But Stoicism of the high-and-dry scholastic kind, although it purported to give men the key of the universe and human life, left many of their natural desires unsatisfied. It did not tell them all they wanted to know. It did not completely make them feel at home in the Universe. In order to do that, it would have to give them more than a hard abstract scheme; it would have to fill in the detail in a way which would give the imagination something to cleave to. Supposing, for instance, you held the view, sanctioned by Cleanthes and Chrysippus, that the good man's soul maintained its individual existence after death till it was re-absorbed into the Primal Fire, you had not, I suppose, any very clear image before your mind of a destiny to be desired. And this kind of defect was, one must believe, more generally felt at the time of the Christian era than in the days when Stoicism was first instituted. For some reason or other, men apparently had come to feel more keenly the inadequacy of a life limited by our bodily senses, to strain more and more, in tedium or disgust, or in some craving for a larger life, away from this world to the Unexplored beyond. Of course, the feeling had always existed to some extent: the old Bacchic and Orphic sects centuries before had borne witness to it among the Greeks: but in the later world the feeling had become more general. This is one of those shiftings of mood which come in the life of peoples as well as in that of individuals, hard to account for, except partially, hard often to grasp with any precision. A feeling came over men, and suddenly the familiar Universe seemed a strange place, terrifying in its enormous magnitude— the earth stretching into regions of unexplored possibilities, moved and shaken by inhuman forces, and over all the silent enigma of the wheeling stars. They awoke, as it were, to find themselves lost in the streets of a huge, strange city. The old Stoicism was inadequate to meet the needs of a mood like that.

To make men at home in the Universe —it seems to me that perhaps such a formula as that would give the key to the whole activity of Posidonius, his work in geography and physics and history as well as in philosophy. If you had read through the mass of his writings, you might really look round upon this world and know where you were. You would have some definite image of the shape of the earth upon which you stood, and things like tides and earthquakes would no longer be the manifestation of some utterly unknown power. And especially when you looked up to the sky and the shining bodies which moved about there, some with such impressive regularity, some appearing and disappearing at odd moments, you would have some notion what it all meant. But it would be quite insufficient for peace of mind that a man should know merely the shape and mechanism of the house in which he found himself. It was still more important to know who his fellow denizens were, to know what it meant for him when the body which was the organ of his conscious life was left a dead and empty shell. And as to these things there were actually in circulation, come down from former generations, a number of positive statements. It is impossible for us now to know how far the ideas thrown out by Plato in his vivid myths as to the soul's destinies, how far the doctrines of the Orphics and Pythagoreans, actually commanded belief among average educated Greeks at a time when the official heads of the Platonic society had lapsed into Scepticism. We only know that the writings of Plato himself were still widely read, and the books of the Pythagoreans and older Academics were still accessible. We may be sure that the ideas they suggested were still a living issue, that the minds of many men dwelt upon them, wondering whether they were true. You may remember that a contemporary of Posidonius, a fellow Stoic, the Roman Cato, spent the evening before his suicide in re-reading the Phaedo. How many people beside Posidonius eked out Stoicism by drawing upon this body of ideas we do not know. We know that this is just what Posidonius did. We know, too, that just at the same time there was a new outburst of Pythagoreanism, in which Cicero's friend Nigidius Figulus was prominent.

But the kind of ideas as to the soul and its destinies which we find in the Orphics and Pythagoreans and Plato had not been an independent creation of some Greek visionaries centuries before. It seems to me that O. Gruppe does good service when he insists, in his book on Greek religion, that the appearance of such doctrines among the Greeks was only part of a larger movement—a ‘mystical’ movement, Gruppe calls it, and though the term is open to misunderstanding I don't know any better one to suggest—which affected the peoples of Nearer Asia as well as the Greeks in the sixth century B.C.

In consequence of this movement, we may believe that ideas were still current, were in the air, among great masses of mankind at the time of Posidonius, which we can only very imperfectly trace in our existing literary documents. Posidonius, on this view, in combining Stoicism with Platonic doctrine as to the soul and its destinies was accommodating philosophy to a great body of popular belief.

But Stoicism could not be combined with Platonism and not suffer some modifications in its structure. A characteristic running through the mystical doctrines— popular, Pythagorean, Platonic—was the strongly-marked dualism of body and soul. The basis of the conviction was no doubt a real experience; there did actually sometimes come over men with compelling power a feeling of the essential inadequacy of the sense-life, dissatisfaction with all that the senses could supply to the understanding, still more poignant dissatisfaction with all that the senses could supply in passionate pleasure to the emotions. And such feeling was met by the assertion that there dwelt verily in this body a Being of immortal nature that yearned for the radiant sphere whence it had come. No wonder it found the body narrow and fetid and dark! In one form or other that had been said by the Orphics and Pythagoreans, by Empedocles and Plato. But Stoicism in its original form had strictly ruled out this dualism. The body was of the same substance, in a depotentiated state, as the soul. The antithesis for the orthodox Stoics was not between body and soul, but between emotion (pathos) and tranquillity. Wherever the dualism prevailed, the bodily appetites were especially what was pointed at when one spoke of the body prevailing over the soul. Intended to become nothing more and nothing less than the surrender of the soul to bodily appetites, and on the other hand the redemption of the soul consisted essentially in resisting or suppressing these appetites; an ascetic discipline of life was the natural corollary of the dualistic view in the sphere of conduct. But yet it was obvious to thought that these appetites and passions were not outside the soul but within it; they were a part of consciousness; if a man was greedy, it was not that his material body compelled his soul to its own separate will, but that the man chose certain sorts of consciousness in preference to other sorts.

It had seemed to Plato that the psychological facts were best represented, as you well know, by depicting the Soul as a combination of three entities—the Reason, the Part you are angry with, and the Part which feels appetite. His pictorial representation did obviously serve well to describe some aspects of experience, the way in which different selves seem to be fighting with each other for dominance in what we call conflicts of Reason and Passion. On the other hand, if you took Plato's description literally, you were brought up against the fact that after all it was one self which reasoned and desired, one self which ultimately chose this or that sort of consciousness. The Stoics—at any rate Chrysippus, for the views of Zeno and his first disciples on the point seem doubtful—felt strongly the unity of the agent as against Plato's threefold division. Chrysippus insisted that only one Ruling Principle, one hegemonikon, was concerned, which itself underwent a modification for evil, when it turned from what was reasonable to inordinate emotion: an irrational part of the soul, he said, such as Plato had supposed, was a figment. The Ruling Principle in man was Reason all through: the passions were diseases of the Reason itself: they were wrong judgements of value.

Our first thought might be that such a view of the soul, insisting on its unity, lent itself better to the dualistic tendency than the Platonic view, especially when coupled, as by the Stoics, with the theory that the reason in each man was a fragment of the One Divine Fire. But on second thoughts we see, I think, that if it was the feeling of the nobler part of them being overmastered by an alien power which really drove men to the dualism of Soul and Body, the Stoic theory which recognized no alien power in the constitution of man would not do. Stoicism did, of course, distinguish the Reason, the spark of Divine Fire, from the body of gross flesh, but by bringing the passions within the Reason it made the division in the wrong place from the Orphic, Pythagorean, Platonic point of view. There must be a root of evil in man himself, a law in his members warring against the law of his mind, and this was given by the irrational part of the soul in the Platonic psychology. Posidonius, on this point, set himself emphatically on the side of Plato against the orthodox Stoic tradition. He wrote a special work in several books, Concerning the Passions, against Chrysippus, considerable fragments of which have been excavated from Galen.

He attacked the view that the passions were simply wrong judgements of the Reason. If so, how was it that they lost their power, wore themselves out, with time? No one got tired of believing that twice two was four. ‘The cause of the passions,’ he writes in a fragment which Galen probably gives word for word, the cause, that is, of disharmony and the unhappy life, is that men do not follow absolutely the daimon that is in them, which is akin to, and has alike nature with, the Power governing the whole kosmos but turn aside after the lower animal principle and let it-run away with them. Those who fail to see this ... do not perceive that the first point in happiness is to be led in nothing by the irrational, unhappy, godless element in the soul. The figure of Reason as the charioteer controlling, or failing to control, the irrational parts of the soul—that figure, suggested by Plato, is the one that sums up the Psychology and Ethics, to which the bulk of the educated world subscribed at the time of the Christian era. Posidonius uses it, of course: Philo recurs to it again and again. In one passage the language of Posidonius takes a more urgent note. We hear the cry which was going up from the hearts of many men in that old world for deliverance from something in themselves. Chrysippus and the orthodox Stoics maintained that there was no root of evil in human nature, and they explained moral evil in each individual, somewhat naively, as due to the bad influences of society. But Posidonius, says Galen, does not hold that badness enters into men from without only and has no root of its own in our souls. ' The germ of badness is in ourselves, and what we all need is not so much to run away from the wicked as to follow after those who may make us clean and hinder the badness from growing in us.

'The irrational, unhappy, godless element of the soul'—a hundred years later some one was crying, 'Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?'

The books of the old Academy and the Pythagoreans, where Posidonius found this doctrine of the soul, had also a good deal to say about the destinies of the soul, when it did escape from the prison of the body. Here too he, and the popular philosophy, filled up the deficiencies of scholastic Stoicism,—and that although his master Panaetius had departed from the tradition in the contrary direction, not by elaborating the picture of life after death, but by denying the survival of the individual soul altogether. Yet it is curious to notice how true to the Stoic presuppositions in some respects Posidonius remained. He did not give up the belief that the soul was itself material, a subtle invisible fire, and its abode after death would be just as much within our stellar system as when it was in the body. It would find itself, on leaving the body, in the cloudy atmosphere surrounding the earth. Here, however, it would not be alone; it would discover that the atmosphere was full of beings like itself. The soul, the daimon who had been dwelling in a body would be among a multitude of other daimons. That was an old belief which had been endorsed by the first disciples of Plato, and Posidonius found it reasonable. If, he argued, earth and water were inhabited by living beings, by beings with souls, how much more must the air, whose substance was so much more like soul-substance, have beings in it endowed with soul and reason! And Posidonius seems to have believed that these demons maintained an individual, imperishable existence, from one period of world-conflagration to the next. When the soul at death passed into the air it was only going back to the region whence it had come; its residence in the body was a transient episode in its life.

What happened to the disembodied daimon depended, of course, upon what manner of life the individual had lived on the earth. And here Posidonius repelled some of the traditional ideas as emphatically as he endorsed others. All the accounts of penal "sufferings inflicted upon the souls of the wicked, which had been a prominent part of the old Orphism and had been taken up by Plato and his disciple Xenocrates—these Posidonius the Stoic could not accept. There was no such place as the Homeric, Orphic, Platonic, Hell. Remember that he would acknowledge the existence of no world outside this material one we see, and its topography left no room for a hell anywhere. The poets seemed to place it under the ground, but that, Posidonius said, was impossible, as the earth was solid.

Posidonius would not even allow the view of Xenocrates, that the disembodied souls were tormented for their sins in the air, the view which we find reflected in some passages of the Sixth Book of the Aeneid. For the daimon the divine mind in man, could only suffer through its union with the body, and when that union was dissolved there could be for it no more passion and no more pain. And yet Posidonius upheld the distinction between the souls of the righteous and the wicked, and nowhere, I suppose, does the Stoic materialism come in more quaintly. For the soul, as we saw, was literally a sort of vapour, and the effect of giving way to passion was that the substance of the vapour got muddy to a greater or less degree. By a law of physics airy and fiery substances rose in space till they reached an environment of the same quality as themselves. Now the outer spheres of the world, the spheres of the fixed stars, of the five planets and the Sun, were composed of pure ether, but with the sphere of the Moon the divine essence began to be mixed with baser humours, and the air below the moon grew thicker and more turbid the nearer you came to the centre of things, to the globe of the earth.



They therefore, who in the body had retained its purity flew instantly on being liberated to the region of the pure stars, cleaving the grosser atmosphere like a shaft of flame. But the others, more or less weighed down by the foulness they had contracted in the body, rose only till they reached an air of their own quality. There they remained floating till their substance regained its clearness and they too could mount beyond the moon. But some were so burdened with uncleanness that they were kept close down to the earth, so close that they were pulled back again into new bodies and once more experienced passion and pain. That was how they were punished.

For the only real hell was found here on this earth, and the impure were ever drawn back into it anew.

And Heaven too was within this system of material spheres. You could see it quite plainly overhead any clear night, when you looked up into that expanse of stars, even if you could not go there. There at any rate all the souls of good men were till the next world-conflagration.

And Posidonius knew what they were doing. They were watching the stars go round. This to us might not seem an occupation of ever-fresh interest, but the idea of it apparently suggested the perfection of bliss to the men of those days. Do you remember the striking passage in the Georgics where Virgil describes what he desires to gain from ‘the sweet Muses, whose holy things he bears ingentl percussus amore? It is, in the first place, not, as one might expect, poetical afflatus, but to understand the ways of the sky and the stars,’ to know the reason of eclipses and earthquakes and tides. Those were just the desires which the disembodied souls in the upper world satisfied to their hearts' content.

And there was something else which they were conceived to do. In a passage of Plutarch, which is thought to re-echo something in Posidonius, there is described how the disembodied daimones do not put off all interest in the struggles of earth. They are there to encourage the souls which are hard bestead in the waves of life as they strain by self-conquest towards the haven. The soul must win its own salvation, but if after ten thousand re-births it arrives at last, spent with toil, at the shore, God does not grudge that its own familiar daimon should give it help: nay, He allows any daimon who will, to help it: and one daimon is eager to help this soul to safety and another daimon that, with a word of cheer. And the soul hears, because the daimon comes very close to it, and is saved: or if it does not hearken, the daimon lets it go, and so much the worse for the soul.'

You will see that when the Stoic books talked about the world as one great city, of which gods and men were citizens, it was really a much more compact and knowable whole which was presented to their imaginations than is suggested by the Universe to ours. Even to Posidonius, indeed, the spaces of the heavens were vast, as compared with the globe of Earth, yet he could see the fiery orbs which marked the outer boundary of the universe, the flammantia moenia mundi and there was nothing beyond. There were no possibilities of modes of being and life altogether outside the field of the senses, to make Posidonius uneasy. The whole of Reality was for him contained within the envelope of fiery ether, one world, knit together by a natural sympathy between all the parts.

This sympathy between the parts was a leading idea of Stoicism, to which Posidonius apparently gave fresh emphasis. It was the basis for the Stoic theory of Divination. An abstract from his work on divination may probably be discerned in the First Book of Cicero's De Divinatione. According to this, Posidonius distinguished two sorts of divination, the scientific (artificiosa) and the natural. Scientific divination consisted in the methodical observing, over sufficiently long periods of time, of the connection which particular signs had with particular events. The connection might be established empirically even if one could not give the explanation of it. The explanation, indeed, might be just that God had ordered the whole process of things from the beginning as a coherent design, and Time was but the uncoiling of a rope which existed already complete in the Divine Purpose. Natural divination, on the other hand, did not rest on any logical inference. It was an immediate communication from God or disembodied daimons to the soul, when its bodily faculties were neutralized in sleep or frenzy—or it might be that the embodied daimon in us had an immense fund of experience gathered through countless ages in converse with innumerable other souls, a fund of experience accessible to us only when the tumult and stir of the bodily senses was stilled. Especially for one sort of divination which was coming to dominate the Greco-Roman world did the doctrine of the sympathy of the universe purport to give a rational basis—for the new science of Astrology. A great deal of the thrill with which men looked up to the stars, which made them think, as we saw, that the contemplation of their movements was the chief part of the bliss of heaven, came from the belief that those movements were connected by some occult natural necessity with the events on earth. There is evidence that Posidonius, whose interest covered the whole field of science, did not neglect Astrology.

But there is the less need to enter upon this topic, as it has been treated by Cumont in his lectures published last year under the title Astrology and Religion among the Greeks and Romans. Here, too, Posidonius is a conspicuous figure. Cumont is so great an authority on these subjects that if any of his statements appear to one questionable, one must suspect that this is due to one's own imperfect knowledge. I should, however, like to suggest for re-consideration his view that Posidonius adulterated Stoicism with the religious traditions of the Syrians. That Posidonius came from Syria is true; but, as we saw, he appears to have left his home early and to have regarded his fellow countrymen with contempt. So far as I can see, Posidonius cannot be proved to have incorporated with Stoicism anything more than was already found in the Platonic-Pythagorean tradition.

Even so, however, there would be a sense in which it was true that Posidonius, as Cumont says, was an agent in bringing about a syncretism between East and West. If his philosophy was itself restricted to traditions which had already good Hellenic sanction, it did, no doubt, exhibit those traditions in a form, into which it was peculiarly easy to fit Oriental accessories later on.

There is an undeniable family resemblance between his world, in which the souls rise through grosser air to the spheres of divine ether, and the worlds of the Gnostics a century or two later, where the souls strive to make their way upward through the demon-guarded spheres of the Seven Planets to the sphere of light and bliss beyond. Again, the doctrine of Posidonius that in the childhood of the human race men had lived in holy innocence, nearer in spirit to the divine; this doctrine that the soul might receive direct enlightenment from beings not in the body, apart from all processes of the reason—all that, of course, blended easily with those beliefs in a tradition going back to some primitive revelation, or to some more recent prophet, which were characteristic of Eastern religions and Gnostic sects.

We can understand that many a Greek later on, whose thought had been shaped by Posidonius, had categories ready, when he encountered the new conceptions which were penetrating the Hellenistic world from the East; that many a Jew, like Philo, when he wished to present his faith to the Greek world in terms of Greek philosophy, found much in Posidonius that only wanted a little manipulation to carry his message.

It was not the triumph of Christianity which was fatal to the world-view, one variety of which is represented by Posidonius; perhaps, indeed, that view never had more splendid expression than in the great Christian poem which came from the heart of mediaeval Italy. What was fatal to it was the triumph of Copernicus. Man, if he limited his view to the material world, was once more a mote in an unfathomable universe.





LECTURE IV


THE SCEPTICS





As soon as the human spirit awoke to see in the old familiar world an enigma, a problem, an unexplored mystery, there were many confident enough to undertake its discovery, ready to hold a belief as to what lay beyond the field of the senses—to believe and affirm. It was this buoyant hope which nerved Greek philosophy when it first came into being with Thales and the lonians, which nerved it all through its long spiritual travail up to Plato and Aristotle, to Zeno and Epicurus. And yet in the very effort there came ever and again the revulsion of despair, the sick feeling that the effort was no good, that there was no winning any real knowledge from the void. That disconsolate sceptical note is heard even in the young adventurous days of Greek philosophy—in Xenophanes :



The certain truth there is no man who knows, nor ever shall be, about the Gods and all the things whereof I speak. Yea, even if a man should chance to say something utterly right, still he himself knows it not: there is nothing anywhere but guessing.



or in Empedocles :



When they have but looked upon the little .portion of their own life, they fly away in a moment, like smoke, persuaded each one of that particular thing only with which he has come into contact as they are driven hither and thither, and yet each one flatters himself that he has found the whole; so far are these things beyond the reach of men, not to be seen of the eye, or heard of the ear, or comprehended with the mind.



The very affirmations which philosophers made, from Thales onwards, produced in many minds a reaction of doubt, for affirmation was soon clashing with affirmation, and the theory which was promulgated one day as the latest truth was before long superseded by another. In the philosophers whom we have quoted, the sceptical doubt haunted only the background of their consciousness and did not find utterance except in momentary phases of thought. But there must have been many people whom the disputes of philosophers discouraged from putting any faith in philosophy at all. Such people may have been much more numerous than the fragments of old Greek philosophical writing show. For scepticism is naturally less vocal than dogmatism. We know something of the men who had a theory to propagate, and contended for it with voice or pen, but we know nothing of all those who shrugged their shoulders and went their way. It is only where scepticism itself becomes a formulated theory that it leaves record of itself in the history of philosophy.

The man who is reckoned the Founder of Scepticism as a definite tradition was a contemporary of the men who founded the two great dogmatic systems of Stoicism and Epicureanism. Pyrrho of Elis was there to mark all dogma with a query. We cannot be exactly sure what he taught, since he left no writing and stands rather as a strong problematic figure at the back of the Sceptical tradition, just as Socrates stands behind the Platonic. We know for one thing that he went with Alexander the Great to India. Wild statements have often been made as to Indian influences travelling Westward. In this case there is good ground for believing that upon a day more than two thousand years ago, under the sky of the Punjab, this Greek, his mind full of Homer and Democritus, did come face to face with dark impassive sannyasis, their minds full of another world of things. It is a moment which kindles the historical imagination. Unfortunately just here, where the contact is provable, no transmission of Indian doctrine can be traced. It was only the memory of that strange impassiveness and detachment which Pyrrho seems to have carried away; it was that which he strove in his afterlife to reproduce. Probably the Indian sages had no particular desire to instruct the alien from the West, and ignorance of each other's language would in any case have limited the communication of metaphysical ideas.

What Pyrrho taught we can only know from the accounts of others, notably of his disciple, Timon of Phlius. Apparently the two main influences in his scepticism were, on the one hand, Democritus, who had laid stress on the merely subjective character of sensation and on the other hand the Sophistic criticism. Democritus had had his own dogma and here Pyrrho would not follow. He took up the old contention of Protagoras. Every affirmation could be logically confronted with its opposite: the clash of dogmas was not something to be surprised at: the conflict belonged to the very nature of dogma. This was the principle of isostheneia, equal strength on both sides of every question, which became a stock part of Greek Scepticism. It really, I suppose, was doing no more than giving a stereotyped label and formulation to what had been the inarticulate feeling all along of those whom the endless controversies of the schools had repelled. Many a plain man, as I suggested, had probably determined in consequence not to bother himself with philosophy, and this was just what Pyrrho's wisdom came to, ataraxia, not to bother oneself. The unhappy desire to know was the cause of all the fever and fret, the polemical passion and torturing doubt. Once grasp that the desire was essentially futile, that you could let the mind play and hold it back all the while from fixed belief, and there was no reason why you should not be perfectly happy and contented in nescience. It was a wonderful deliverance to realize that you need not mind not knowing.

This, apparently, was Pyrrho's gospel. It was not inspired by an acute intellect analysing the process. of thought and coming to a sceptical conclusion; it was strikingly different from the modern Agnosticism which often goes with a vigorous interest in Science; it was the expression of weariness, of disgust with the endless strife of tongues, of the relief found in mere ceasing from effort and stagnation. In the fragments of the satirical poems of Timon, which are our first-hand evidence for this early phase of Scepticism, the hatred of wind-bags, of empty talk, of the pretentious assumption of knowledge, is the one motive running through all. It is really so simple— not to bother and to have done with all the fuss.

This, I suggested, was strikingly different from modern Agnosticism. In its spirit and practical working it does seem to me utterly unlike; but one must allow that if one looks at its theoretical first principles, there is rather striking resemblance. The principle familiar to us in modern Agnosticism, that you can know phenomena and their sequences but you cannot know the Reality which lies behind them, was already enunciated almost in the same words by ancient Scepticism.

'We do not use our sceptical phrases', says Sextus Empiricus, about everything in the world without distinction. We use them only of things inaccessible to the senses and investigated by the way of dogma. The phenomenon we affirm as an appearance to ourselves; we do not make positive statements about the nature of the external objects in themselves.'

Man (as distinguished from other animals) has in the sphere of phenomena a faculty of following the process of things and retaining it. In virtue of this he remembers what phenomena he has observed accompanying each other, what preceding and what coming after, so that when the first members of the sequence are presented to him the rest are revived.' Thus, as is explained in another passage, the Sceptic did not refrain from inferring fire when he saw smoke, or a wound when he saw a scar. These passages are taken from a writer of the second century A.D., Sextus Empiricus, but the principles enunciated seem to go back to Timon, the immediate disciple of Pyrrho. A sentence is preserved from his work – “That honey is sweet I refuse to assert; that it appears sweet, I fully grant.” In another work the line occurred, “The phenomenon is always valid.”

And he maintained that he had not gone against the common practice of humanity. Now such principles, one would think, have only to be extended in their application in order to give us all that is required by modern scientific Agnosticism. The ancient Sceptic, however, never contemplated such extension. You could only, according to him, infer something you did not see from something you did see, when you had actually observed those things, or precisely similar things, in connection. A theory, for instance, like the atomic theory, or, to take a favourite instance of Sextus, the theory of pores in the body, was repudiated, because atoms and pores were things which could never come within the range of sense-perception. That is to say, the immense part which working hypothesis has played in modern science was far from his thought.

There seems to us so obvious a line dividing scientific hypotheses which are based upon precise observation and experiment, accurate measurement and mathematical formulae, from metaphysical and ethical theories, into which numerical measurement cannot enter, that we find it hard, perhaps, to realize that from the standpoint of the ancient Sceptic the difference between physical and metaphysical hypotheses was much less plain. There were plenty of physical hypotheses current in the fourth century B.C. —some, like the atomic theory, anticipations of recent scientific theories — but in default of all instruments for, minute observation and measurement, they were all shots in the dark. What science could there be in the modern sense without the microscope, without the thermometer, without even the watch? The modern scientist must find it hard to transport himself in imagination into such a state of things.

What seems to be the better tradition as to the Sceptical school asserts that Timon of Phlius left no disciple. The school, as a school, ceased-. But its soul, one might say, migrated elsewhere and reappeared in the Academy, which thereby entered another phase of its history. Timon seems for the last forty years of his long life (from about 275 to 235 B.C.) to have made Athens his home. The man who for the greater part of this time sat in the seat of Plato was Arcesilaus, a native of Pitane in Asia Minor. He, too, is among the philosophers who left no writings, and whom it is therefore hard for us now to estimate at their real value. We only know of Arcesilaus that his personality was one which shone conspicuously in the eyes of contemporaries. ‘By a singular conjunction at this moment,’ wrote Eratosthenes with enthusiasm, ‘one city wall contained two philosophers of such eminence as Aristo and Arcesilaus’— hardly two names which occur to us now as luminaries of this magnitude among all the great names of Athens. The notices make us think of Arcesilaus as a man of aristocratic temper, with a certain elegant splendour in his way of living, for he had wealth and knew how to use it, at once fastidious and generous.

He was, we gather, one of those minds for whom the intellectual play of ‘for’ and ‘against’ had its fascination, apart from the desire to arrive at a stable conclusion. Argument was the breath of his nostrils. Under the new system which he introduced into the Academy, instead of an authoritative lecture ex cathedra, a thesis was set up by one of the students, whom Arcesilaus proceeded to cross-examine in Socratic fashion, or he himself argued first on one and then on the other side of a question. For such a mind the doctrine of Pyrrho, which Timon was here in Athens to expound, had natural attraction. It would appeal to him, not as a relief from endless dispute, but as keeping the possibility of argument endlessly open. It could never come to rest in a dogmatic conclusion. Arcesilaus took over the Pyrrhonic Scepticism so fully that it became a question what monopoly he left to the school which had originally enunciated it. Timon seems to have been at pains, so long as Arcesilaus lived, to show that the new Scepticism of the Academy was not of the genuine brand: the Academy was still in bondage.

'What are you doing here, where we free men are?' he is said to have called out to Arcesilaus once, when he saw him passing. And Sextus Empiricus tries to show how the shreds of dogmatism still adhered to Arcesilaus and the Academics. What he alleges, however, to prove it does not seem borne out by what we can ascertain of their real doctrine. Arcesilaus, so Sextus says, affirmed as an objective truth that the holding back of assent was a good, whereas the true Sceptic only stated that it seemed such to him. If this had been the case, Arcesilaus would, of course, have been convicted of the shreds of dogmatism; but according to other accounts the Scepticism of Arcesilaus did not stop short of declaring freely that the unknowableness of Reality was itself doubtful. This, of course, purported to meet the obvious objection which the opponents of Scepticism always brought up against it: “At any rate you assert your own fundamental principle, that the Truth behind phenomena is unknowable.” And the stock answer given by the later Sceptics seems to have been that even their fundamental principle was put forth with a query: the Sceptical philosophy was like a drug which removed itself as well as other substances from the body. The philosopher hard-pressed not seldom finds refuge in a figure.

The distinctive note in the Scepticism of Arcesilaus, so far as we can trace it, was given by its special direction against the new dogmatic system being constructed in Athens, which we considered in our first two lectures. If on the one side a great practical need impelled the teachers of the new dogma, on the other side there was something in the Hellenic spirit which could not but rise up in opposition.

And the Stoic epistemology, framed under the exigency of finding some absolutely certain basis for dogma, did, as we saw, offer only too easy a mark for philosophic criticism. It was a weak part in the defences which naturally drew down the attack of a man like Arcesilaus. The Stoic certainty was built upon the kataleptike phantasia, the impression which left no room for error, because the reality behind it could only be one thing. It all stood upon the assumption that there were impressions which left no possible alternative. And this is just what Arcesilaus denied. And if there were no such impressions, the Stoic sage who gave his absolute belief with entire inerrancy was a figment. On the other hand, the Wise Man, Arcesilaus said, never believed heavily in that way; he never, as it were, let his centre of gravity go over upon any conviction; he saved himself from error by always withholding his assent.

About eighty years after the death of Arcesilaus, the seat of Plato passed to one whose personality stamped itself upon the later philosophical tradition — the Cyrenaean Carneades. Unfortunately, like Arcesilaus, Carneades left practically no writing behind him, so that all we know of his teaching comes through his disciple Clitomachus. Let us look at the disciple before we turn to the master. Clitomachus is interesting as a figure, because he was an example of the spread of Hellenism in that age among people not of Greek blood. He was a Semite from Carthage, and his original name was Hasdrubal. Besides his Greek works, he seems to have written books in Punic, rendering no doubt the conceptions of Greek philosophy in a tongue akin to Hebrew—books which would, one may suppose, be of singular interest to-day to Rabbinical scholars.

The time came when this alien sat as master in Plato's Academy, for the Greeks apparently had no prejudice against men of non-Hellenic blood who were qualified by education to enter their society. If Carneades did not write at all, his disciple Hasdrubal-Clitomachus made up for it by the vast volume of his writing—more than 400 books, we are told. Through them the voice of Carneades reached subsequent generations.

Carneades was like his predecessor Arcesilaus in his passion for argument, his way of exhibiting the strength of both the opposing sides on each question, but one gathers that in contrast with the urbanity and aristocratic manner of Arcesilaus, there was something uncouth and violent, about him. We hear of his uncut hair and neglected nails, and how the director of the gymnasium neighbouring the place where he taught had to send him a message begging him not to shout so. There was a destructive eagerness about him, which made him take a wicked delight in tearing to pieces all the dogmatic systems established in the schools. His cleverness and command of words made him terribly effective, and people went to his lectures to learn rhetoric no less than to learn philosophy. One cannot wonder that when a man of this kind electrified Rome in 156 B.C. by a brilliant oration on the thesis that righteousness was based entirely on convenience, stalwart old conservatives like Cato the Censor saw in Greek philosophy a danger to the State.

So far as one can make out, the principles of Carneades did not differ essentially from those which the Academy had already derived from Arcesilaus. The importance of Carneades is probably rather to be found in the rhetorical cleverness which gave much wider currency and popularity to the Sceptical arguments throughout the Greek world, and in his furnishing the opponents of established beliefs in Providence, in Divination, in Fate with an armory of stock arguments, such as we meet with in Cicero and the later Sceptics. If Carneades made any original contribution to philosophy, it was apparently in his elaborating a theory of belief based on degrees of probability. The putting forward of probability as a substitute for the certain knowledge claimed by the dogmatists was what people specially connected with the name of Carneades. His theory seems to have taken its start here too from the doctrine of Arcesilaus.

We shall see in a moment, when we come to the Sceptic rule of living, that Arcesilaus had found a guiding principle in the idea of the ‘reasonable.’ The ‘probable’ of Carneades was, modern books tell us, the 'reasonable' of Arcesilaus, only transferred from the sphere of conduct to the sphere of knowledge. The transference was perhaps not as important in its working out, as it might appear. The ‘probable’ has indeed reference to the question, ‘What is true?’ whereas the ‘reasonable’ has reference to the question ‘What is good to do?'— in so far Carneades may naturally seem to turn his interest from practice to knowledge.

But when we look at the actual context of appeals to the probable, we find that the intellectual illumination is always represented, not as the satisfaction of a speculative curiosity about the world, but as affording light for practice. Perhaps Carneades felt more vividly than Arcesilaus that conduct could be reasonable only if it were guided by a judgement of some kind—knowledge or conjecture —as to what things are. Hence, Scepticism having destroyed the basis of certain belief, Carneades felt the need of his system of probability. The older Sceptics had said, The Wise Man will always withhold his assent and, knowledge being unattainable, will keep his mind immune from opinion. Carneades seems to have found this not quite satisfactory. It was plain, of course, that if you allowed the Wise Man to hold an opinion you exposed him to error.

Well, you must take the risk of that, Carneades said: it is no good trying to get the Wise Man out of the necessity of giving any sort of assent, because to act on an hypothesis is to assent to it practically, and the Wise Man, we are all agreed, must act sometimes. Hence Carneades boldly maintained in opposition to his predecessors that the Wise Man would hold opinions; only his opinions would be limited to the sphere of things which determined conduct, i.e. phenomena—not the background of phenomena, gods and so on—and would be regulated according to degrees of probability.

The ferment which the restless criticism of Carneades and Clitomachus spread through the schools no doubt worked more or less for centuries. But their successors in the Academy, Philo of Larissa and still more Antiochus of Ascalon, found the Sceptical position an uncomfortable one in the long run to maintain, and with Antiochus the Academy practically surrendered to the Stoa. The Sceptical spirit had to find a new incarnation, and found it in a man who professed to go back behind the Academy to the purer Scepticism of Pyrrho and Timon.

This was a man from the old Cretan city of Cnossos, who lived and wrote in Alexandria, Aenesidemus. It seems to be made out that he was a contemporary of Cicero's, probably a younger contemporary, whom Cicero either never heard of or did not think a person of enough account to mention. With Aenesidemus, however, Scepticism entered upon a new period of life which extended over the first two centuries of the Roman Empire, especially, it would seem, in connection with the ‘Empiric’ school of medicine. It is this concluding phase of ancient Scepticism which has delivered to us the one systematic first-hand exposition of it which we possess, the treatises of Sextus Empiricus, dating from the second half of the second century A. D.

There does not seem any ground for regarding either Aenesidemus or any of his followers as thinkers who contributed any really new thoughts to the Sceptical tradition. The substance of Sextus Empiricus probably goes back to Timon, four or five hundred years before. The fundamental principle that the phenomenon alone, each man's sensations and inferences as a fact of consciousness, was certain—this was all through the same. The great argument against dogmatic assurance, the disagreement of one individual with another, the disagreement of the same individual with himself under varying circumstances, this too was the same. In whatever field of things disagreement was possible, in-that field there could be no dogmatic assurance, because the question could always be raised whether what determined my belief in opposition to some other man's was not the personal equation in some form, behind which I obviously could not get, however much I might try, because it was involved in my very efforts to think it away. The only field of certain knowledge therefore left was the field where agreement was universal. The sensation of white, for instance, or the sensation of sweetness is the same for everybody, although the colour and taste of a particular thing might differ according to the individual percipient. And all that we could do, if we did not mean to step into the dark region of things Unknowable, was just to remember what sensations we had found coupled in experience and, when we met with one, to expect the other.

What Aenesidemus did was not to produce a new variety of Scepticism, but, at a time when every one was turning to some form of dogmatism, he gathered up the Sceptical criticism which the schools, he saw, had dodged without meeting, and launched it again upon the world in a more systematic, more closely reasoned, more compact and manageable form, a stereotyped series of arguments. This was the significance of the ten 'Modes' connected with his name — a presentation in detail of the kinds of disagreement intended by Sceptics when they made disagreement a ground for the withholding of assent. The first Mode is the disagreement in perception and physical qualities between men and other animals, the second is disagreement between different sorts of men, the third between the different senses in the same individual, and so on, ending up with disagreements in the sphere of conduct, customs, and laws, of mythological and philosophic belief.

Similarly, Aenesidemus drew up a list of eight fallacies committed by dogmatic philosophers in professing to give an account of the causes behind phenomena. Of course, all this tabulation of the Sceptical arguments under fixed heads was a great furtherance to their popular circulation, even if it added nothing to their substance. You can find them in Sextus Empiricus and in the summary of Sceptical teaching given by Laertius Diogenes.

One cannot say that the writings of Sextus Empiricus, although they contain many interesting things, are great literature, and often there are pages together of nothing but quibbling and logic-chopping, a mere juggling with counters. But the Sceptical School in tire second century A. D. had also among its adherents the most brilliant literary man of the twilight of Hellenism, Lucian of Samosata. Anybody who wants to read the case for Scepticism in a more agreeable form than the treatises of Sextus had better turn to the dialogue of Lucian which bears the name of Hermotimus. Many people have read an abridged and somewhat altered version of it in Marius the Epicurean. It seems to me a little work not unworthy to be set with Plato's.

Here, too, we have the playful irony and the dramatic touches, and behind it all the pathos, the inner tragedy, which lie at the heart of scepticism. The edge of that light mockery bites as shrewdly, its arrows are as penetrating today, it seems to me, as eighteen centuries ago. Pater has made Hermotimus into a young man; this misses a point in the original where he is a man well on in life, who for twenty years has been labouring to find Truth along the Stoic path and not attained; he hopes that he may attain, perhaps in twenty years more. And what Lucian presses upon him is just the old Sceptic argument from the disagreement of the schools. How did Hermotimus know in the first instance which guide, out of all those who offered, he should choose to follow? How could he estimate the value of the different schools without having already the knowledge he was setting out to seek? The far-off City, whose citizens are all blissful and righteous, in the radiance of an unearthly peace — ah, if one knew the way thither, would it not be worth while to throw everything else to the winds, to break every tie, in order to reach it!' Once I heard an old man describing what it is like there, and he exhorted me to follow him to the City. He would be my guide himself and inscribe my name on its registers, when I came there, and make me a member of one of its tribes and get me admitted to his own phratry, so that I too might be blessed among the blessed. " But I hearkened not unto him" as I was young and foolish then, fifteen years ago. Yes, I myself, Hermotimus, have the same desire in any heart that you have, and there is nothing, if I could have my wish, that I should prefer to this. If the City were near and plain for everybody to see, be sure that I should have started for it long ago without question and been its citizen now these many years.' But the way! — that was just what no one knew, and it was better, the Sceptic convinced Hermotimus, to give up the vain hope and shun the philosopher who stirs it up in one's heart as one would a mad dog.

The doctrines of the old philosophic schools, — the soul a fiery vapour, the god that is the ethereal envelope of the Universe, the atoms that fall downwards through infinite space or swerve spontaneously without external cause — any old system as we see it now, looking back, appears so crude, so naive in many of its assertions, that it would be easy, we feel, for us, if we could enter one of those schools with all our modern knowledge, to show how rashly and absurdly those theories were building upon the void. But really I don't know that we could say anything more telling or more apt than the old Sceptics did actually say. The warning voice had sounded out clear to the world and was heard through all the places where men disputed and reasoned; the four hundred volumes of Hasdrubal-Clitomachus, the compact effective arguments of Aenesidemus, the penetrating irony of Lucian, all these things were there, palpable and audible, during the centuries when the determination of the people of the Greco-Roman world slowly matured to put themselves under the authority of a new dogma. Men did not answer the Sceptical arguments : they simply went past them, turned their backs upon them.

Why was this? Why was the logic of the Sceptics impotent to arrest this movement of the human spirit? I think that as we look at the history more closely, we see why. If in the profession of a dogmatic belief the asserter means there is no possibility of my being mistaken: it is as objectively certain that what I maintain is true as that any sensation, which you have, exists as a sensation; if this is what dogmatism means, then the Sceptical argument was a complete and unanswerable refutation of the dogmatic position. And this is very much what dogmatism did mean, in the Stoic, form. The Wise Man was above any possibility of error: the kataleptike phantasia gave him as certain a knowledge of the Stoic dogmas as he had that two and two were four; he would never hold an opinion; he knew.

What the Sceptics proved was that there is nothing, except sensation — to have been quite thorough they ought to have said immediately present sensation— as to the existence of which one must not admit the abstract possibility of error. Any inference from immediate sensation (we may add, any memory of past sensation) may be a delusion. So far the Sceptics were logically triumphant. But there was one respect in which the Sceptical philosophy hopelessly broke down; it broke down just where all Agnosticism must break down, before the exigencies of life—before the fact that man is not only a spectator of Reality, but a maker of it.

If we were minds suspended in space merely watching what went on, we might well, so far as I can see, take the advice of the Sceptic to hold back from all belief; we might simply wait and see what happened. But we have to act, to-day and to-morrow and all the days to come. It was, when all was said and done, because men wanted guidance for action that they turned, in spite of all the Sceptics could urge, to dogmatic systems—to Stoicism, to Epicureanism, and later on to Neoplatonism and the Church. There was an imperious need which the dogmatic systems set out to supply, and which Scepticism could neither supply nor set aside. That was felt by the old opponents of Scepticism, when to all the Sceptical arguments they returned ever again the answer that consistent Scepticism would reduce man to inactivity. It was an objection which went home, and which the Sceptics were at great pains to rebut.

And their attempt to do so is the most pitiful thing imaginable. What had Scepticism to say, when men put the question to it, How then were they to live? In reviewing the successive phases of Scepticism, I have put their attempts to answer that question aside in order that we might consider the practical conclusion of the Sceptical philosophy by itself at the end. The answer of Scepticism to that question was in effect: Well, you will just do what other people do: you will conform to the usages of society: you will let yourself go with the stream Timon, the first exponent of Pyrrhonism in writing, laid stress, as we have seen, on the fact that he had not broken with ordinary conventions. In the Academy Scepticism was in fusion with another and more aristocratic spirit derived from Plato, and had to find some principle of conduct which seemed less like surrendering one's soul to the common herd, a principle which at any rate represented some individual choice, some autonomy. Arcesilaus, according to our report, found this principle is what approved itself to the agent as reasonable, and he seems curiously to have adduced the Stoic definition of a right action as that for which, when it has been performed, a reasonable defence can be made. Probably, this sample of the ethical doctrine of Arcesilaus is merely an argumentum ad hominem a stroke in his standing feud with the Stoics. The Stoics, I think, had been obliged to frame this cumbrous definition of a kathekon because they wanted to describe it as a reasonable action, whilst on their theory no action could be really reasonable except one performed phronimos by the ideal Wise Man.

Arcesilaus seems to have caught it up and said: 'Very well, if you admit that an action can be reasonable in a sense, although not performed with the perfect knowledge possessed by the Wise Man, that is all I want as a guide for action, and you cannot urge against my philosophy that it has made all principle for action impossible.' This does not tell us what Arcesilaus himself understood by 'the reasonable', and in default of further explanation we have only a formal phrase without definite content.

Nor when we come to his brilliant successor Carneades do we get any clearer guidance. Carneades had, as we saw, his theory of graduated probability, which was to be applied to practice, but one cannot gather any definite principles of conduct that Carneades himself suggested as the ones to be followed. Of course, all action implies judgements of two kinds, judgements as to what the existing data are, 'existential' judgements, and judgements as to what ought to be, as to the new reality to be constituted by our action, value-judgements. In both sorts of judgement the Wise Man would, according to Carneades, follow probability; he would form an opinion as to phenomena and their concatenation, and an opinion as to the Good to be realized. But when an instance is given us, it is only a judgement of the first kind; the Wise Man, we are told, would embark on a vessel in virtue of a judgement that it would probably arrive at its destination.

When we ask what Carneades took the Good to be, the end to be aimed at in action, we get no answer. Carneades showed a keen debating interest in the positive doctrines of the different schools; he loved to take one or other of them as a thesis, whose strength he could exhibit with all his forensic cleverness, turning round next to defend the opposite view with equal ability. It was he who mapped out the scheme under which all possible answers to the question, ‘What is the good?' could be logically classified. But to any view of his own on that cardinal question he does not seem to have committed himself, nor are we, by scrutinizing the fragments of his teaching which have come down to us, likely to succeed in enucleating one, since even Clitomachus, his assiduous reporter, admitted that he had never been able to discover what his master really thought.

The later sceptics, Aenesidemus and his line, fell back upon the principle stated at the outset by Timon, convention. The Sceptic rule of practice is clearly explained by Sextus Empiricus. We attend to the appearance of things and live a human life, observing the conditions of such a life, without holding from attainment, the view of the Stoics, who identify this, direction of the will with Virtue; and three double ones. Pleasure plus virtue, maintained by Calliphon, absence of pain plus virtue, maintained by the Peripatetic Diodorus of Tyre, plus virtue, maintained by the ordinary Peripatetics and older Academy.

“They fail to see that the Sceptic does not frame his life as a man according to the doctrine which he professes as a philosopher. So far as he adheres to that, he does not act at all. Only, noticing in an unphilosophic way how things go, he is able to choose some things and shun others. Supposing a tyrant puts constraint upon him to do something abominable, it may be he will be guided in choosing and refusing by such notion of what is fitting as is embodied in the laws and customs of the society to which by birth he belongs. He will also bear hardships more easily than the man of dogmatic beliefs, because his sensation will not have an opinion added to it as an extra (the opinion that his suffering is an evil), as will be there in the case of the other man.”

It seems poor comfort to a man in pain to tell him that after all he does not know that his pain is an evil, for the retort is so obvious that he does not know whether it is not. But it was the best comfort the Sceptic had to give. Sextus tries to eke it out by repeating the assertion made by Epicurus, that if pain was severe it did not last long, and if it lasted long it was not severe; but be does not feel quite satisfied with that, since he breaks out in the end: 'Well, and if we do feel very great distress, it is not our fault; we suffer because we must, not because we want to; it is all the fault of Nature, "who careth for no law,”as the verse says. This may be true, but is not very helpful. There is one passage in which Sextus strikes a stronger note. “What happens to the Sceptic of necessity,” he says, he accepts bravely. One cannot quarrel but it implies, of course, a belief in certain values which, if reflected on, carries one far beyond the narrow Sceptical ground.

The regular answer, then, of ancient Scepticism to those who sought from it a guide for conduct was simply to refer them to what happened to be the prevailing practice of their society. So far from furnishing a principle for the criticism and improvement of prevalent convention, it might lend itself to the support of any bad custom. If it liberated the intellect from dogma, it only brought practice the more into bondage. It could not even effectually attack the superstition which dominated so much of the life of the ancient world, since while it was concerned to maintain that every dogma might be false, it had to admit that any superstition might be true. If it would have refused to say credo quia impossibile, it was obliged to say Non nego quia ineptum. If you knew absolutely nothing about God, you had no right to say that the popular mythology was any worse representation of Him than the conceptions of the philosopher.

We find, therefore, the whole religious tradition of the ancient state, as a system of ritual and mythological imagery, defended on Sceptical principles. 'The Sceptic', says Sextus, will be found acknowledging the gods according to the customs of his country and the laws, and doing everything which tends to their proper worship and reverence, but in the region of philosophic inquiry he makes no rash assertion In Cicero's De Natura Deorum the part of the Sceptic is sustained by one who holds the office of pontifex in the Roman state. I have always defended and will always defend, he explains, the traditional ceremonies of religion, and no argument of any one, learned or simple, will ever make me budge from the belief which I have received from our ancestors as to the worship of the immortal gods.

If you, as a philosopher, can justify my religion on rational grounds, good: but I am bound to believe our ancestors, even though they give no reason — and Cotta proceeds by means of the arguments of Carneades and Clitomachus to demolish the proofs which the Stoic has adduced of the Divine government of the world.

The old proud religions of the Greco-Roman world were already, when Sextus wrote, being assailed by an enemy which had caught up the weapons of the philosophic Sceptics, no longer in a mood of academic criticism, but with the passion and intense purpose of a new-found faith. And by Scepticism the old religions tried to paralyze the attack. The defender of Paganism against Christianity in the little dialogue of Minucius is a Sceptic. Just because Nature is dark and the Truth undiscoverable, how much better to follow the religious practices handed down to you, to worship the gods whom your parents taught you rather to fear than to know with too close a familiarity, to advance no opinion as to the Divine powers, but to believe the men of old!’

But Scepticism brought obviously in the long run more hindrance than help to those who sought its aid. For if it enabled them to safeguard the absurdities of the traditional religion from rational attack, it incapacitated them for attacking anything irrational in the new dogma. It was agnostics of the type of Cicero's Cotta and Caecilius in the dialogue of Octavius who prepared the Greco-Roman world to listen without much sense of strangeness to the credo quia impossible of Tertullian. The ancient world then had found no stable equilibrium. lt was driven on the one hand by its bitter need towards dogmatic systems, such as the Stoic, and on the other driven back from dogmatism into a scepticism which left it void of counsel. Between the two it swung unhappily for generations. Carneades in his theory of graduated probability might seem to have indicated a central position in which it might have settled. But a life directed by the computation of logical probabilities somehow lacks appeal for the human spirit. If besides these three, dogmatism, scepticism, and the calculation of logical probabilities, there is no other possible attitude of the human mind in the face of this Universe, then there would appear no hope but that the tragedy of the ancient world should be ceaselessly repeated till the story of mankind is done. But is there not another possible attitude, which perhaps was implicit in Christianity from the beginning, though in the formulation of Christianity the dogmatic, too exclusively intellectual, habit of the Greek world obscured and mistook it?

What account, for instance, is to be given of the belief, the loyal confidence, which a man has in his friend? It has surely a certainty as intensely real as the certainty of the dogmatist, and yet if the man represented that certainty as one of inerrant logical deduction, a mathematical certainty, it would be easy for the Sceptic to show the logical possibilities of error at every turn. The very gaps of logical proof which the Sceptic might point out give room for the moral assurance to hold its own, rejoicing: if in friendship we walked all through by sight, and never by faith, what scope would there be for trust? For that trust a friend could tolerate no weaker word than certainty. He would repel even the suggestion that in his attitude to the man he loved he should be guided by a careful computation of probabilities. Certainty?

Yes: but if he represented that certainty to be the same as logical, as mathematical certainty, he would put himself in the wrong and be given defenseless into the hand of the Sceptic. And that mistake, I suggest, is just such a mistake as the ancient dogmatists made in defining their attitude to the great Friend behind the Universe, just such a mistake as was made by their successors whose task, it was to formulate the faith of the Christian Church.





LIFE OF CARNEADES


By


Diogenes Laërtius





Carneades, the son of Epicomus or (according to Alexander in his Successions of Philosophers) of Philocomus, was a native of Cyrene. He studied carefully the writings of the Stoics and particularly those of Chrysippus, and by combating these successfully he became so famous that he would often say:

Without Chrysippus where should I have been?

The man's industry was unparalleled, although in physics he was not so strong as in ethics. Hence he would let his hair and nails grow long from intense devotion to study. Such was his predominance in philosophy that even the rhetoricians would dismiss their classes and repair to him to hear him lecture.

His voice was extremely powerful, so that the keeper of the gymnasium sent to him and requested him not to shout so loud. To which he replied, "Then give me something by which to regulate my voice."

Thereupon by a happy hit the man replied in the words, "You have a regulator in your audience." His talent for criticizing opponents was remarkable, and he was a formidable controversialist. And for the reasons already given he further declined invitations to dine out. One of his pupils was Mentor the Bithynian, who tried to ingratiate himself with a concubine of Carneades; so on one occasion (according to Favorinus in his Miscellaneous History), when Mentor came to lecture, Carneades in the course of his remarks let fall these lines by way of parody at his expense:

Hither comes an old man of the sea, infallible, like to Mentor in person and in voice. Him I proclaim to have been banished from this school.

Thereupon the other got up and replied:

Those on their part made proclamation, and these speedily assembled.

He seems to have shown some want of courage in the face of death, repeating often the words, "Nature which framed this whole will also destroy it." When he learnt that Antipater committed suicide by drinking a potion, he was greatly moved by the constancy with which he met his end, and exclaimed, "Give it then to me also." And when those about him asked "What?" "A honeyed draught," said he. At the time he died the moon is said to have been eclipsed, and one might well say that the brightest luminary in heaven next to the sun thereby gave token of her sympathy.

According to Apollodorus in his Chronology, he departed this life in the fourth year of the 162nd Olympiad at the age of eighty-five years. Letters of his to Ariarathes, king of Cappadocia, are extant. Everything else was compiled by his pupils; he himself left nothing in writing. I have written upon him in logaoedic metre as follows:

Why, Muse, oh why wouldst thou have me censure Carneades? For he is ignorant who knoweth not how he feared death. When wasting away with the worst of diseases, he would not find release. But when he heard that Antipater's life was quenched by drinking a potion.

"Give me too," he cried, "a draught to drink."

"What? pray what?"

"Give me a draught of honeyed wine." He had often on his lips the words, "Nature which holds this frame together will surely dissolve it."

Nonetheless he too went down to the grave, and he might have got there sooner by cutting short his tale of woes.

It is said that his eyes went blind at night without his knowing it, and he ordered the slave to light the lamp. The latter brought it and said, "Here it is."

"Then," said Carneades, "read."

He had many other disciples, but the most illustrious of them all was Clitomachus, of whom we have next to speak.

There was another Carneades, a frigid elegiac poet.





IMAGE GALLERY


Michel Eyquem de Montaigne (1533-1592)




Montaigne, one of the most significant philosophers of the French Renaissance, known for popularizing the essay as a literary genre, was a great admirer of Diogenes Laërtius. He appreciated his insight into the private lives of the Greek sages and exclaimed that he wished that instead of one Laërtius there had been a dozen.





Knossos Fresco




Aenesidemus, the ancient Greek founder of Scepticism was born in Knossos on the island of Crete. Knossos or Cnossos is now a large Bronze Age archaeological site and is considered Europe's oldest city.



"Prince of lilies" or "Priest-king Relief", plaster relief at the end of the Corridor of Processions, restored by Gilliéron, believed by Arthur Evans to be a priest-king, wearing a crown with peacock feathers and a necklace with lilies on it, leading an unseen animal to sacrifice.





Roman marble bust of Epicurus





Small bronze bust of Epicurus from Herculaneum




Illustration from Baumeister, 1885.





The Nuremburg Chronicle




Epicurus depicted in The Nuremberg Chronicle.





Plutarch (c. AD 46 – AD 120)




Greek (later Roman) historian Plutarch is an important source for biographical information about the early Greek philosophers, including the Stoics and Sceptics.



Portrait of Plutarch, Greek historian. The caption reads: “Your wise teaching served as an impressive crown Of Trajan, exalted above all men. If great men heeded you[r words] in their minds and hands [to put them to practice], Virtue would live, instead of Venus [lust] & Bellona [war].”





Democritus (center) and Protagoras (right)




The two Sophists depicted in this 17th century painting by Salvator Rosa.





Democritus




Democritus (meaning "chosen of the people"; c. 460 – c. 370 BC) was an influential Ancient Greek pre-Socratic philosopher primarily remembered today for his formulation of an atomic theory of the universe.





Democritus by Hendrick ter Brugghen, 1628





Posidonius (c. 135 BCE – c. 51 BCE)





